i 



COSMOS: 



A SKETCH 



A PHYSICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE UNIVERSE. 



ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT, //t^?- ' ^^f. 



TIUNSLATED FROM THE GERMAN, 

BY E. C OTTE. 



Watura vero rcrum vis atque majestas in omnibus momentis fide caret, si quia mo do 
partes ejus ac non totam complectatur animo.— Plin., Hist. Nat., lib. vii. c. L 



VOL. 11. 



NEW YORK: 
HARPER &amp; BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS 

329 &amp; 331 PEARL STRJEET, 

FRANKLIN SQUARE. 

1866. 






CONTENTS OP YOl. 11. 

PART I. 
INCITEMENTS TO THE STUDY OF NATURE. 

THK IMAGE REFLECTED BY THE EXTERNAL WORLD ON THE IMA3- 
INATION. POETIC DESCRIPTION OF NATURE. LANDSCAPE PAINT- 
ING. THE CULTIVATION OF EXOTIC PLANTS, WHICH CHARACTER- 
IZE THE VEGETABLE PHYSIOGNOMY OF THE VARIOUS PARTS OF 
THE earth's SURFACE 1 9-21 

I. Description of Nature. — The Difference of Feeling excited by the 
Contemplation of Nature at different Epochs and among different 

Races of Men 21-82 

Descriptions of Nature by the Ancients 21 

Descriptions of Nature by the Greeks 22 

Descriptions of Nature by the Romans 29 

Descriptions of Nature in the Christian Fathers 39 

Descriptions of Nature by the Indians 43 

Descriptions of Nature by the Minnesingers i 44 

Descriptions of Nature by the Arian Races 49 

Natural Descriptions by the Indians 50 

Natural Descriptions in the Persian Writers 52 

Natural Descriptions in the Hebrew Writers 57 

Hebrew Poetry 58 

Literature of the Arabs 60 

General Retrospect 62 

Descriptions of Nature in early Italian Poets 62 

Descriptions of Nature by Columbus 66 

Descriptions of Nature in Camoens's Lusiad 68 

Descriptions of Nature in Ercilla's Araucana 71 

Calderon 73 

Modern Prose Writers 74 

Travelers of the fourteenth and fifteenth Centuries 78 

Modern Travelers 79 

Goethe 82 

II. Landscape Painting^ in its Influence on the Study of Nature. — 
Graphical Representation of the Physiognom,y of Plants. — The 

Character and Aspect of Vegetation in different Zones 82-98 

Landscape Painting among the Ancients 83 

The Brothers Van Eyck , 87 

Landscape Painting of the sixteenth and seventeenth Centuries 88, 8£ 
Franz Post d Haarlem 90, 91 



IV CONTENTS. 

Pag4 

Introduction of Hot-houses in our Gardens 91 

The Treasures open to the Landscape Painter in the Tropics. . . 93 

The Perfection of Art in Greece 94 

The Condition of Art in more Modern Times 95 

Tropical Scenery 96 

Panoramas 98 

IIL Cultivation of Tropical Plants. — Contrasts and Assemblages 
of Vegetable Forms. — Impressions induced by the Physiognomy 

and Character of the Vegetation 99-105 

Cultivation of Exotic Plants 99 

Eastern Gardens , 101 

Chinese Parks and Gardens 103 

Physiognomy of Nature 105 



PART 11. 

HISTORY OF THE PHYSICAL CONTEMPLATION OF THE UNIVERSE.^ 
PRINCIPAL CAUSES OF THE GRADUAL DEVELOPMENT AND EXTEN- 
SION OF THE IDEA OF THE COSMOS AS A NATURAL W^HOLE 106-118 

The Knowledge of Nature among the Ancients 108 

Events which have been the Means of extending a Knowledge 

of Nature 109 

Comparative Philolog)'- Ill 

The Idea of the Unity of the Cosmos US 

History based on Human Testimony knows of no Primitive Race 114 

Ancient Seats of Civilization 117 

PRINCIPAL MOMENTA THAT HAVE LI^l'LUENCED THE HISTORY OF 

THE PHYSICAL CONTEMPLATION OF THE UNIVERSE 119 

I. The Mediterranean considered as the Starting-point 119-153 

Civilization in the Valley of the Nile 124 

The Cultivation of the Phoenicians 128 

The Amber Trade 131 

The geographical Myth of the Elysion 133 

The Expeditions of Hiram and Solomon 136 

The Ophir (El Dorado) of Solomon 138 

The Etruscans 139 

The highly-gifted Hellenic Races 140 

The Landscape of Greece ^ 143 

The three Events which extended the Knowledge of the Universe 144 

The Extent of Inland Traffic 146 

The Doric Migrations -. 148 

Contact with the East 149 

The Passage beyond the Pillars of Hercules 151 

II. Expeditions of the Macedonians under Alexander the Great 153-169 
Thft Foundation of Greek Cities in Asia 1 53 



CONTENTS. "V 

P«g« 

The vast Sphere of new Ideas opened to Mankind by the Cam- 
paigns of Alexander 155 

The Countries through which the Macedonians passed 157 

The Natural Products first made known 158 

Aristotle 160 

The Men of Aristotle's School 163 

The Comparison of Races 165 

The Schools of Babylon 156 

Alexander's Advance to the Land of the Five Rivers 168 

III. Extension of the Contemplation of the Universe under the 
Ptolemies 170-179 

The three great Ptolemies 171 

The Caravan Trade, its Influence in extending a Knowledge of 

different Countries 171, 172 

Proofs of the Commercial Relations maintained by the Egyptians 174 

The Tendency of the Schools of Alexandria 174 

The Foundation of the Alexandrian Museum 175 

The Alexandrian Astronomers 176 

The slow Advance of Astronomy from those remote Ages to its 

present high Stand 179 

IV. Universal Dominion of the Romans 180-199 

The Extent of the Area of the Roman Dominions 181 

The few Observers of Nature who appeared at this Period 182 

The Greatness of the National Character of the Romans 184 

Diffusion of the Latin Tongue 185 

The Expeditions undertaken by Asiatic Rulers 186 

The Works of Strabo and Ptolemy 187 

The Way-measurers in use among the Chinese 191 

The Optical Inquiries of Ptolemy 19V 

The Botanical Gardens of the Romans 195 

The Historia Naturalis of Pliny 195 

Reference to the Influence exercised by the Establishment of 

Christianity 199 

V. Invasion of the Arabs 200-228 

Principal Momenta of the Recognition of the Unity of Nature . . 200 

The Arabs 201 

Natural Products of Arabia 204, 205 

Nomadic Life in Arabia 207 

Mental Culture of the Arabs 208 

Arabian Geographers 213 

The learned Men of Arabia 216 

Astronomical Works of the Arabs 222 

Science of Numbers 225 

VI. Period of Oceanic Discoveries 228-301 

The fifteenth Century, its Tendencies 228 

The first Discovery of Amei'ica 230 



VI CONTENTS. 

The conjectured Discovery of America by the Irish 234 

The Efforts of Missionaries 235 

The Traces of Gaelic supposed to be met with in American Dia- . 

lects ■ 236 

The Rediscovery of America by Columbus 238 

The Discovery of Tropical America 240 

Albertus Magnus, Bacon, and Vincenzius of Beauvais 241 

Realists and Nominalists 243 

The Encyclopedic Works of the fifteenth Century 246 

The Revival of Greek Literature 248 

Important Events in Asia 249 

Early Travelers 249, 250 

Marco Polo's Narratives 251 

Use of the Magnetic Needle ; 253 

The supposed Inventor of the Mariner's Compass 254 

Application of Astronomy to Navigation 255 

Martyr de Anghiera 260 

The Charts consulted by Columbus 261 

The Characteristics of Columbus 263 

The Discovery and Navigation of the Pacific 267 

The first Circumnavigation of the Earth 270 

The Conquistadores 271 

The Discovery of the Sandwich Islands, &amp;c 272 

Spanish Travelers in the new Continent 274 

Papal Line of Demarkation 277 

Line without Magnetic Variation 278 

The Magnetic Pole 281 

The Line of Perpetual Snow 282 

The Equatorial Current 283 

The first Descriptions of the Southern Constellations 286 

The Coal-bags and the Magellanic Clouds 286 

The Southern Cross 288 

The Determination of the Ship's Place 291 

The Age of the Conquista 296 

VII. Great Discoveries in the Heavens 301-351 

The Telescope 302 

The seventeenth Century 302 

Nicolaus Copernicus 303 

The different Stages of the Development of Cosmical Contempla- 
tion 309 

The Theory of Eccentric Intercalated Spheres 316 

The great Men of the seventeenth Century 316 

The accidental Discovery of the Telescope ,.... 317 

Telescopic Discoveries 319 

The Discovery of Jupiter's Satellites ,. 320 

The Spots upon the Sun 324 

Galileo ■ . . 324 

Kepler 325 



CONTENTS. yil 

Page 

The Zodiacal Light , 329 

Polarization and Interference of Light 332 

Measurable Velocity of Light 333 

William Gilbert 334 

Edmund Halley 336 

Land and Sea Expeditions 336 

Instruments for measuring Heat 337 

The Electric Force 341 

Otto von Guericke 342 

Pneumatic Chemistry 343 

Geognostic Phenomena 347 

The Charm inherent in Mathematical Studies 351 

VIII. Retrospect of the Epochs considered 352-356 

Recapitulation 352 

The Power of penetrating Space 353 

Early Gems of Natural Knowledge 364 

The Advance of various Science* 355 



SUMMARY. 

Vol. II. 

GENERAL SUMMARY OF THE CONTENTS. 

A.. Incitements to the Sttidy of Nature. — The image reflected by the «x 
ternal world on the imagination I*ag6 19-21 

I. Poetic Delineation of Nature. — The feeling entertained for nature 

according to difference of times and races p. 21-82 

II. Landscape Painting. — Graphical representation of the physiog- 

nomy of vegetation p. 82-98 

III. Cultivation of Exotic Plants. — Contrasted apposition of vegeta- 
ble forms p. 99-105 

B. History of the Physical Contemplation of the Universe. — Principal 
momenta of the gradual development and extension of the idea of 
the Cosmos as one natural whole p. 106-118 

I. The Mediterranean the starting-point of the attempts at an ad- 
vance toward the northeast (by the Argonauts), toward the south (to 
Ophir), toward the west (by the Phoenicians and Colaeus of Samos). 
Simultaneous reference to the earliest civilization of the nations who 
dwelt around the basin of the Mediterranean p. 1 19-153 

II. Campaigns of the Macedonians under Alexander the Great. — Fu- 
sion of the East anil West. Hellenism furthers the blending of nations 
from the Nile to the Euphrates, the Jaxartes and the Indus. Sudden 
extension of the contemplation of the Universe by direct observations, 
as well as by intercourse with anciently-civilized industrial nations 

p. 153-169 

III. Increased Contemplation of the Universe under the Ptolemies. — 
Museum at Serapeum. Encyclopedic learning. Generalization of nat- 
ural views regarding the earth and the regions of space. Increased 
maritime trade toward the south p. 170-179 

IV. Universal Dominion of the Romans. — Influence of a political 
union on Cosmical views. Advance of geography by means of inland 
trade. The development of Christianity generates and fosters the feel- 
ing of the unity of the human race p. 180-199 

V. Irruption of the Arabian Races. — Intellectual aptitude of this 
branch of the Semitic races. Taste for the study of nature and its 
forces. Medicine and chemistry. Extension of physical geography, 
astronomy, and the mathematic sciences generally p. 200-228 

VI. Period of Oceanic Discoveries. — Opening of the western hemi- 
sphere. America and the Pacific. The Scandinavians. Columbxxs, 
Cabot, and Gama ; Cabrillo, Mendaiia, and Quiros. The greatest 
abundance of materials now presented itself to the western nations of 
Europe for the establishment of physical geography p. 228-301 

VII. Period of the great Discoveries in the Regions of Space. — The 
application of the telescope. Principal epochs in the history of astron* 
omy and mathematics, from Galileo and Kepler to Newton and Leib 
nitz ^, 1 p. 301-b£5 

A2 



X SUMMARY OF THE CONTENTS. 

VIII. Retrospect. — Multiplicity and intimate connection of the scien- 
tific etForts of recent times. The history of the physical sciences be- 
comes gradually associated with the history of the Cosmos 

Page 352-356 

SPECIAL SUMMARY. 

A.. Means of Incitement to the Study of Nature p. 19-21 

I. Poetic Delineation of Nature. — The principal results of observation 
referring to a purely objective mode of ti'eating a scientific description 
of natm'e.have already been treated of in the picture of nature; we 
now, therefore, proceed to consider the reflection of the image con- 
veyed by the external senses to the feelings and a poetically-framed 
imagination. The mode of feeling appertaining to the Greeks and Ro- 
mans. On the reproach advanced against these nations having enter- 
tained a less vivid sentiment for nature. The expression of such a sen- 
timent is more rare among them, solely in consequence of natural 
descriptions being used as mere accessories in the great forms of lyric 
and epic poetry, and all'things being brought in the ancient Hellenic 
forms of art within the sphere of humanity, and being made subservi- 
ent to it. Paeans to Spring, Homer, Hesiod. Tragic authors: frag- 
ments of a lost work of Aristotle. Bucolic poetry, Nonnus, Anthology — 
p. 27. Romans: Lucretius, Virgil, Ovid, Lucan, Lucilius the younger. 
A subsequent period, in which the poetic element appears only as an 
incidental adornment of thought; the Mosella, a poem of Ausonius. 
Roman prose writers; Cicero in his letters, Tacitus, Pliny. Descrip- 
tion of Roman villas — p. 38. Changes in the mode of feeling and in 
*'he\v representation produced by the diffusion of Christianity and by 
an anchorite life. Minucius Felix in Octavius. Passages taken from 
the writings of the Fathers of the .Church : Basil the Great in the wil- 
derness on the Armenian river Iris, Gregory Nyssa, Chrysostora. Mel- 
ancholy and sentimental tone of feeling — p. 38-43. Influence of the 
difference of races manifested in the different tone of feeling pervading 
the natural descriptions of the nations of Hellenic, Italian, North Ger- 
manic, Semitic, Persian, and Indian descent. The florid poetic litera- 
ture of the three last-named races shows that the animated feeling for 
nature evinced by the North Germanic races is not alone to be ascribed 
to a long deprivation of all enjoyment of nature through a protracted 
winter. The opinions of Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm on the chivalric 
poetry of the Minnesingers and of the German animal epos ; Celto-Irish 
descriptions of nature — p. 48. East and west Arian nations (Indians 
and Persians). The Ramayaua and Mahabharata; Sakuntala and Ka- 
lidasa's Messenger of Clouds. Persian literature in the Iranian High- 
lands does not ascend beyond the period of the Sassanidae — p. 54. (A 
fragment of Tlieodor Goldstticker.) Finnish epic and songs, collected 
by Elias Lonnrot from the lips of the Karelians — p. 56. Aramseic na- 
tions : natural poetry of the Hebrews, in which we trace the reflection 
of Monotheism — p. 57-60. Ancient Arabic poetry. Descriptions in 
Antar of the Bedouin life in the desert. Descriptions of nature in Ara- 
ru'l Kais — p. 61. After the downfall of the Araraasic, Greek, and Ro- 
man power, there appears Dante Alighieri, whose poetic creations 
breathe from time to time the deepest sentiment of admiration for the 
terrestrial life of nature. Petrarch, Boiardo, and Vittoria Colonna. 
The ^tna Dialogus and the picturesque delineation of the luxuriant 
vegetation of the New World in the Historice Venetce of Bembo. Chris- 
topher Columbus — p. 66. Canioens's Lusiad — p. 68. Spanish poe« 



SUMMARY OF THE CONTENTS. JQ 

try : the Araucana of Don Alonso de Ercilla. Fray Luis de Leon and 
Calderon, with the remarks on the same of Ludwig Tieck. Shakspeare, 
Milton, Thomson — p. 74. French prose writers: Rousseau, BufFon, 
Bernardin de St. Pierre, and Chateaubriand — p. 75-77. Review of 
the narratives of the older travelers of the Middle Ages, John Mande- 
^ille, Hans Schiltberger, and Bernhard von Breitenbach ; contrast with 
modem travelers. Cook's companion, George Forster — p. 80. The 
blame sometimes justly applied to descriptive poetry as an independ- 
ent form does not refer to the attempt either to give a picture of distant 
zones visited by the writer, or to convey to others, by the force of 
applicable words, an image of the results yielded by a direct contem- 
plation of nature. All parts of the vast sphere of creation, from the 
equator \o the frigid zones, are endowed with the happy power of ex- 
ercising a vivid impression on the human mind — p. 82. 

II. Landscape painting in its animating influence on the study of na- 
ture. In classical antiquity, m accordance with the respective mental 
direction of different nations, landscape painting and the poetic delin- 
eation of a particular region were neither of them independent objects 
of art. The elder Philostratus. Scenography. Ludius. Evidences 
of landscape painting among the Indians in the brilliant period of Vi- 
kramaditya. Herculaneum and Pompeii. Painting among Christians, 
from Constantino the Great to the beginning of the Middle Ages ; of 
landscape painting in the historical pictures of the brothers Van Eyck. 
The seventeenth century the most brilliant epoch of landscape paint- 
ing. Miniatures on manuscripts — p. 87. Development of the ele- 
ments of painting. (Claude Lorraine, Ruysdael, Gaspard and Nicolas 
Poussin, Everdingen, Hobbima, and Cuyp.) Subsequent striving to 
give natural truthfulness to the representation of vegetable forms. Rep- 
resentation of tropical vegetation. Franz Post, the companion of Prince 
Maurice of Nassau. Eckhout. Requirement for a representation of 
the physiognomy of nature. The great and still imperfectly completed 
cosmical event of the independence of Spanish and Portuguese Ameri- 
ca, and the foundation of constitutional freedom in regions of the chain 
of Cordilleras between the tropics, where there are populous cities sit- 
uated at an elevation of 14,000 feet above the level of the sea, together 
with the increasing civilization of India, New Holland, the Sandwich 
Islands, and Southern Africa, will undoubtedly impart a new impulse 
and a more exalted character to landscape painting, no less than to me- 
teorology and descriptive geography. Importance and application of 
Barker's panoramas. The conception of the unity of nature and the 
feeling of the harmonious accord pervading the Cosmos will increase 
in force among men in proportion to the multiplication of the means for 
representing all natural phenomena in delineating pictures — p. 98. 

III. Cultivation of Exotic Plants. — Impression of the physiognomy 
of vegetable forms, as far as plantations are capable of producing such 
an impression. Landscape gardening. Earliest plantation of parks in 
Central and Southern Asia. Trees and groves sacred to the gods — p. 
102. The gardens of the nations of Eastern Asia. Chinese gardens 
under the victorious dynasty of Han. Poem on a garden, by the Chi- 
nese statesman See-ma-kuang, at the close of the eleventh century. 
Prescripts of Li3u-tscheu. Poem of the Emperor Kien-long, descrip- 
tive of nature. Influence of the connection of Buddhist monastic estab- 
lishments on the distribution of beautiful characteristic vegetable Ibrmg 
—p. 105. 

B. History of the Physical Contemplation of the Universe. — The histo 



XL SUMMARY OF THE CONTENTS 

ry of the recognition of the universe is wholly different from the history 
of the natural sciences, as given in our elementary works on physics 
and on the morphology of plants and animals. This is the history of 
our conception of the unity of phenomena, and of the reciprocal con 
nection existing among the natural forces of the universe. Mode of 
treating a history of the Cosmos : a. The independent efibrts of reason 
to gain a knowledge of natural laws ; h. Cosmical events which have 
suddenly enlarged the horizon of observation ; c. The invention of new 
means of sensuous perception. Languages. Points of radiation from 
which civilization has been diffused. Primitive physics and the natural 
science of barbarous nations obscured by civilization — p. 118. 

Principal Momenta of a History of a Physical Contemplatitm of the 
Universe. 

I. The basin of the Mediterranean the starting-point of the attempts 
to extend the idea of the Cosmos. Subdivisions in the form of the ba- 
sin. Importance of the form of the Arabian Gulf. Intersection of two 
geognostic systems of elevation from N.E. to S.W., and from S.S.E. to 
N.N.W. Importance of the latter direction of the lines of intersection 
considered with reference to general international intercourse. An- 
cient civilization of the nations dwelling round the Mediterranean. 
The Valley of the Nile, the ancient and modern kingdom of the Egyp- 
tians. The Phoenicians, a race who favored general intercourse, were 
the means of diffusing alphabetical writing (Phoenician signs), coins as 
medium of currency, and the original Babylonian weights and meas- 
ures. The science of numbers, arithmetic. The art of navigating by 
night. West African colonies — p. 130. 

Pelasgian Tyi'rhenians and Etruscans (Rasenae). Peculiar tendency 
of the Etrurian races to maintain an intimate communion with natural 
forces ; the fulguratores and aquileges — p. 140. 

Other anciently civilized races dwelling around the Mediterranean. 
Traces of cultivation in the East, under the Phrygians and Lycians ; 
and in the West, under the Turduli and the Turdetani. Dawn of Hel- 
lenic power. Western Asia the great thoroughfare of nations emigra 
ting from the East; the iEgean island world the connecting link be- 
tween Greece and the far East. Beyond the 48th degree of latitude, 
Europe and Asia are fused together, as it were, by flat steppes. Pher- 
ecydes of Syros, and Herodotus, considered the whole of North Scyth- 
ian Asia as appertaining to Sarmatian Europe. Maritime power, and 
Doric and Ionic habits of life transmitted to the colonial cities. Ad- 
vance toward the East, to the Euxine and Colchis ; first acquaintance 
with the western shore of the Caspian Sea, confounded, according to 
Hecataeus, with the encircling Eastern Ocean. Inland trade and bar 
ter carried on by the chain of Scytho-scolotic races with the Argippae 
ans, Issedones, and the Arismaspes, rich in gold. Meteorological myth 
of the Hyperboreans. Opening of the port of Gadeira toward the west, 
which had long been closed to the Greeks. Navigation of Colaeus of 
Samos. A glance into the boundless ; an unceasing striving for the far 
distant; accurate knowledge of the great natural phenomenon of the 
periodic swelling of the sea — p. 153. 

II. Campaigns of the Macedonians under Alexander the Great, and the 
long-enduring Influence of the Bactrian Empire. — With the excf ption of 
the one great event of the discovery and opening of tropical America 
eighteen and a half centuries later, there was no other period in which 
a richer field of natural views, and a more abundant mass of materials 



SUMMARY OF THE CONTENTS. XlH 

for the foundations of cosmical knowledge, and of comparative ethno- 
logical study, were presented at once to one single portion of the human 
race. The use of these materials, and the intellectual elaboration of 
matter, are facilitated and rendered of more importance by the direo 
tion imparted by the Stagirite to empirical investigation, philosophical 
speculation, and to the strict definitions of a language of science. The 
Macedonian expedition was, in the strictest sense of the word, a scien- 
tific expedition. Callisthenes of Olynthus, the pupil of Aristotle, and 
friend of Theophrastus. The knowledge of the heavens, and of the 
earth and its products, was considerably increased by intercourse with 
Babylon, and by the olDservations that had been made by the dissolved 
Chaldean order of priests — p. 169. 

III. Increase of the Contemplation of the Universe under the Ptole 
mie*.— Grecian Egypt enjoyed the advantage of political unity, while its 
geographical position, and the entrance to the Arabian Gulf, brought 
the profitable traffic of the Indian Ocean within a few miles of the south- 
eastern shores of the- Mediterranean. The kingdom of the Seleucidas 
did not enjoy the advantages of a maritime trade, and was frequently 
shaken by the conflicting nationality of the different satrapies. Active 
traffic on rivers and caravan tracks with the elevated plateaux of the 
Seres, north of the Uttara-Kuru and the Valley of the Oxus. Knowledge 
of monsoons. Reopening of the canal connecting the Red Sea with the 
I^ile above Bubastus. History of this water route. Scientific institu- 
tions under the protection of the Lagides ; the Alexandrian Museum, 
and two collections of books in Bruchium and at Rhakotis. Peculiar 
direction of these studies. A happy generalization of views manifests 
itself, associated with an industrious accumulation of materials. Era- 
tosthenes of Cyrene. The first attempt of the Greeks, based on imper- 
fect data of the Bematists, to measure a degree between Syene and 
Alexandria. Simultaneous advance of science in pure mathematics, 
mechanics, and astronomy. Aristyllus and Timochares. Views enter- 
tained regarding the structure of the universe by Aristai'chus of Samos, 
and Seleucus of Babylon or of Erythraea. Hipparchus, the founder of 
scientific astronomy, and the greatest independent astronomical observer 
of antiquity. Euclid. Apollonius of Perga, and Archimedes — p. 179. 

IV. Influence of tKe Universal Dominion of the Romans and of their 
Empire on the Extension of Cosmical Views. — Considering the diversity 
in the configuration of the soil, the variety of the organic products, the 
distant expeditions to the Amber lands, and under iElius Gallus to Ara- 
bia, and the peace which the Romans long enjoyed under the monarchy 
of the Caesars, they might, indeed, during four centuries, have afforded 
more animated support to the pursuit of natural science ; but with the 
Roman national spirit perished social mobility, publicity, and the main- 
tenance of individuality — the main supports of free institutions for the 
furtherance of intellectual-development. In this lon^ period, the only 
observers of nature that present themselves to our notice are Dioscori- 
des, the Cilician, and Galen of Pergamus. Claudius Ptolemy made the 
first advance in an important branch of mathematical physics, and in 
the study of optics, based on experiments. Material advantages of the 
extension of inland trade to the interior of Asia, and the navigation of 
Myos HoiTTios to India. Under Vespasian and Domitian, in the time 
of the dynasty of Han, a Chinese army penetrates as far as the eastern 
shores of the Caspian Sea. The direction of the stream of migration in 
Asia is from east to west, while in the new continent it inclines froro 
north to south. Asiatic migrations begin, a century and a half before 



XIV SUMMARY OF THE CONTENTS. 

our era, with the inroads of the Hiungnu, a Turkish race, on the fair, 
haired, blue-eyed, probably Indo-Germanic race of the Yueti and Usun, 
near tlae Chinese Wall. Roman embassadors are sent, under Marcus 
Aurelius, to the Chinese court by way of Tonkin. The Emperor Clau- 
dius received an embassy of the Rashias of Ceylon. The great Indian 
mathematicians, Warahamihira, Brahmagupta, and probably also Arya- 
bhatta, lived at more recent periods than those we are considering ; but 
tha elements of knowledge, which had been earlier discovered in India 
in wholly independent and separate paths, may, before the time of Di- 
ophantus, have been in part conveyed to the West by means of the ex- 
tensive universal commerce carried on under the Lagides and the Cae- 
sars. The influence of these widely-diffiised commercial relations ia 
manifested in the colossal geographical works of Strabo and Ptolemy. 
The geographical nomenclature of the latter writer has recently, by a 
careful study of the Indian languages and of the histoiy of the west Ira- 
nian Zend, been recognized as a historical memorial of these remote 
commercial relations. Stupendous attempt made by Pliny to give a 
description of the universe ; the characteristics of his encyclopedia of 
nature and art. While the long-enduring influence of the Roman do- 
minion manifested itself in the history of the contemplation of the uni- 
verse as an element of union and fusion, it was reserved for the diffti 
ision of Christianity (when that form of faith was, from political motives, 
forcibly raised to be the religion of the state of Byzantium) to aid in 
awakening an idea of the unity of the human race, and by degrees to 
give to that idea its proper value amid the miserable dissensions of re- 
ligious parties — p. 199. 

V. Irruption of the Arabs. — Effect of a foreign element on the pro- 
cess of development of European civilization. The Arabs, a Semitic 
primitive race susceptible of cultivation, in part dispel the barbarism 
which for two hundred years had covered Europe, which had been 
shaken by national convulsions ; they not only maintain ancient civil, 
ization, but extend it, and open new paths to natural investigation. 
Geographical figure of the Arabian peninsula. Products of Hadramaut, 
Yemen, and Oman. Mountain chains of Dschebel-Akhdar, and Asyr. 
Gerrha, the ancient emporium for Indian wares, opposite to the Phce- 
nician settlements of Aradus and Tylus. The northern portion of the 
peninsula was brought into animated relations of contact with other 
cultivated states, by means of the spread of Arabian races in the Syro- 
Palestinian frontier mountainous districts and the lands of the Euphra- 
tes. Pre-existing indigenous civilization. Ancient participation in the 
general commerce of the universe. Hostile advances to the West and 
to the East. Hyksos and Ariaeus, prince of the Himyarites, the allies 
of Minus on the Tigris. Peculiar character of the nomadic life of the 
Arabs, together with their caravan tracks and their populous cities — p. 
200-208. Influence of the Nestorians, Syrians, and of the pharmaceu- 
tico-medicinal school at Edessa. Taste for intercourse with nature and 
her forces. The Arabs were the actual founders of the physical and 
chemical sciences. The science of medicine. Scientific institutions in 
the brilliant epoch of Almansur, Haroun Al-Raschid, Mamun, and Mo- 
tasem. Scientific intercourse with India. Employment laade of the 
Tscharaka and the Susruta, and of the ancient technical arts of the 
Egyptians. Botanical gardens at Cordova, under the Calif Abdurrah- 
man the poet — p. 208-217. Efforts made at independent astronomical 
observations and the improvement in instruments. Ebn J.*nis employ? 
the pendulum as a measure of time. The work of Alhaz on the re 



SUMMARY OF THE CONTENTS. XV 

fractiofl of rays. Indian planetary tables. The disturbance in the 
moon's longitude recognized by Abul Wefa. Astronomical Congress 
of Toledo, to which Alfonso of Castille invited Rabbis and Arabs. Ob 
servatory at Meragha, of Ulugh Beig, the descendant of Timur, at Sam- 
arcand, and its influence. Measurement of a degree in the plain be- 
tween Tadmor and Rakka. The Algebra of the Arabs has originatecJ 
from two currents, Indian and Greek, which long flowed independent 
ly of one another. Mohammed Ben Musa, the Chowarezmier. Dio- 
phantus, first translated into Arabic at the close of the tenth century, 
by Abul Wefa Buzjani. By the same path vvhich brought to the Arabs 
the knowledge of Indian Algebra, they likewise obtained in Persia and 
on the Euphrates the Indian numerals and the knowledge of the ingen- 
ious device of Position, or the employment of the value of position. 
They transmitted this custom to the revenue officers in Northern Afri- 
ca, opposite to the coasts of Sicily. The probability that the Christians 
of the West were acquainted with Indian numerals earlier than the 
Arabs, and that they were acquainted, under the name of the system 
of the Abacus, with the employment of nine ciphers, according to their 
position-value. The value of position was known in the Suanpan, de- 
rived from the intei'ior of Asia, as well as in the Tuscan Abacus. Would 
a permanent dominion of the Arabs, taking into account their almost 
exclusive predilection for the scientific (natural, descriptive, physical, 
and astronomical) results of Greek investigation, have been beneficial 
to a general and free mental cultivation, and to the creative power of 
art?— p. 219-228. 

VI. Period of the great Oceanic Discoveries. — America and the Pa- 
cific. Events and extension of scientific knowledge which prepared 
the way for great geographical discoveries. As the acquaintance of the 
nations of Europe with the western portion of the globe constitutes the 
main object of this section, it is absolutely necessary to divide in an in- 
contestable manner the first discovery of America in its northern and 
temperate zone by the Northmen, from the rediscovery of the same con- 
tinent in its tropical regions. While the Califate of Bagdad flourished 
under the Abbassides, America was discovered and investigated to the 
41^° north latitude by Leif, the son of Erik the Red. The Faro6 Islands 
and Iceland, accidentally discovered by Naddod, must be regarded as 
intermediate stations, and as starting points for the expeditions to the 
Scandinavian portions of America. The eastern coasts of Greenland in 
Scoresby's Land (Svalbord), the eastern coasts of Baffin's Bay to 72° 
55', and the entrance of Lancaster Sound and Barrow's Straits, were 
all visited — Earlier (?^ Irish discoveries. The W^hite Men's Land be 
tween Virginia and Florida. Whether, previously to Naddod and In- 
golf's colonization of Iceland, this island was inhabited by Irish (West- 
men from American Great Ireland), or by Irish missionaries (Papar, 
the Clerici of Dicuil), driven by the Northmen from the Faro6 Islands? 
The national treasures of the most ancient records of Northern Europe, 
endangered by disturbances at home, were transferred to Iceland, which 
three and a half centuries earlier enjoyed a free social.Constitution, and 
were there preserved to future ages. We are acquainted with the com- 
mercial relations existing between Greenland and New Scotland (the 
American Markland) up to 1347 ; but as Greenland had lost its repub- 
lican Constitution as early as 1261, and, as a crown fief of Norway, had 
been interdicted from holding intercourse with strangers, and there- 
fore also with Iceland, it is not surprising that Columbus, when he vi&amp;r 
ited Iceland in 1477, should have obtained no tidings of the new conti- 



XVI SUMMARY OF THE CONTENTS. 

nent situated to the west. Commercial relations existed, however, as 
late as 1484, between the Norwegian port of Bergen and Greenland — 
p. 228-238. 

Widely different, in a cosmical point of view, from the isolated aKd 
barren event of the first discovery of the new continent by the North- 
men, was its rediscovery in its tropical regions by Christopher Colum 
bus, although that navigator, seeking a shorter route to Eastern Asia, 
had not the object of discovering a new continent, and, like Amerigo 
Vespucci, believed to the time of his death that he had simply reached 
the eastern shores of Asia. The influence exercised by the nautical 
discoveries of the close of the fifteenth and the beginning of the six- 
teenth century on the rich abundance of the ideal world, can not be 
thoroughly understood until we have thrown a glance on the ages which 
separate Columbus from the blooming period of cultivation under the 
Arabs. That which gave to the age of Columbus the peculiar character 
of an uninterrupted and successful striving for an extended knowledge 
of the earth, was the appearance of a small number of daring minds 
(Albertus Magnus, Roger Bacon, Duns Scotus, and William of Occam), 
who incited to independent thought and to the investigation of sepa- 
rate natural phenomena ; the revived acquaintance with the works of 
Greek literature • the invention of the art of printing ; the missionary 
embassies to the Mogul princes, and the mercantile travels to Eastern 
Asia and South India (Marco Polo, Mandeville, and Nicolo de' Conti); 
the impi'ovement of navigation ; and the use of the mariner's compass 
or the knowledge of the north and south pointing of the magnetic 
needle, which we owe to the Chinese through the Arabs — p. 238-254. 
Early expeditions of the Catalans to the western shores of Tropical 
Africa; discovery of the Azores ; general atlas of Picigano, of 1367. Re- 
lations of Columbus to Toscanelli and Martin Alonso Pinzon. The more 
recently known chart of Juan de la Cosa. The South Pacific and its 
islands — p. 255-273. Discovery of the magnetic line of no variation in 
the Atlantic Ocean. Inflection observed in the isothermal lines a hund- 
red nautical miles to the west of the Azores. A physical line of demark- 
ation is converted into a political one; the line of demarkation of Pope 
A-lexander VI., of the 4th of May, 1493. Knowledge of the distribution 
of heat; the line of perpetual snow is recognized as a function of geo- 
graphical latitude. Movement of the waters in the Atlantic Ocean. 
Great beds of sea-weed — p. 273-285. Extended view into the world 
of space ; an acquaintance with the stars of the southern sky ; more a 
sensuous than a scientific knowledge. Improvement in the method of 
determining the ship's place; the political requirement for establishing 
the position of the papal line of demarkation increased the endeavor to 
discover practical methods for determining longitude. The discovery 
and first colonization of America, and the voyage to the East Indies 
round the Cape of Good Hope, coincide with the highest perfection of 
art, and with the attainment of intellectual freedom by means of relig- 
ious reform, the forerunner of great political convulsions. The daring 
enterprise o.f the Genoese seaman is the first link in the immeasurable 
chain of mysterious events. Accident, and not the deceit or intrigues 
of Amerigo Vespucci, deprived the Continent of America of the name 
of Columbus. Influence of the. New World on political institutions, 
and on the ideas and inclinations of the people of the Old Continent — 
p. 985-301. 

VII. Period of great Discoveries in the Regio7is of Space. — The ap- 
plication of the telescope : a more correct view of the stnicture of the 



SUMMARY OF THE CONTENTS. XVll 

nniverse prepared the way for these disccveries. Nicholas Copernicus 
was engaged in making observations with the astronomer Brudzewski 
at Cracow when Columbus discovered America. Ideal connection be- 
tween the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, by Peurbach and Re- 
giomontanus. Copernicus never advanced his system of the universe 
as an hypothesis, but as incontrovertible truth — p. 301-313. Kepler 
and the empirical planetary laws which he discovered — p. 313-317. 
Invention of the telescope; Hans Lippershey, Jacob Adriaansz (Meti- 
as), and Zacharias Jansen. The first fruits of telescopic vision : mount- 
ains of the moon ; clusters of stars and the Milky Way ; the four satel- 
lites of Jupiter ; the triple configuration of Saturn ; the crescent foma 
of Venus; solar spots; and the period of rotation of the sun. The dis- 
covery of the small system of Jupiter indicates a memorable epoch in 
the fate and sound foundation of astronomy. The discovery of Jupiter'a 
satellites gave rise to the discovery of the velocity of light, and the rec- 
ognition of this velocity led to an explanation of the aberration-ellipse 
of the fixed stars — the perceptive evidence of the translatory movement 
of the earth. To the discoveries of Galileo, Simon Marius, and Johann 
Fabi-icius followed the discovery of Saturn's satellites by Huygens and 
Cassini, of the zodiacal light as a revolving isolated nebulous ring by 
Childrey, of the variation in brilliancy of the light of the fixed stars by 
David Fabricius, Johann Bayer, and Holwarda. A nebula devoid of 
stars in Andromeda described by Simon Marius — p. 317-331. While 
the seventeenth century owed at its commencement its main brilliancy 
to the sudden extension of the knowledge of the regions of space afforded 
by Galileo and Kepler, and at its close to the advance made in pure 
mathematical science by Newton and Leibnitz, the most important of 
the physical problems of the processes of light, heat, and magnetism, 
likewise experienced a beneficial progress during this great age. Double 
refraction and polarization ; traces of the knowledge of the interference 
of light in Grimaldi and Hooke. William Gilbert separates magnetism 
from electricity. Knowledge of the periodical advance of lines with- 
out variation. Halley's early conjecture that the polar light (the phos- 
phorescence of the earth) is a magnetic phenomenon. Galileo's ther- 
moscope, and its employment for a series of regular diurnal observations 
at stations of different elevation. Researches into the radiation of heat. 
Torricellian tubes, and measurements of altitude by the position of the 
mercury in them. ' Knowledge of atrial currents, and the influence of 
the earth's rotation on them. Law of rotation of the winds conjectured 
by Bacon. Happy, but short-lived, influence of the Accademia del Ci- 
mento on the establishment of mathematical natural philosophy, as based 
on experiment. Attempts to measure the humidity of the atmosphere ; 
condensation hygrometer. The electric process; telluric electricity; 
Otto von Guericke sees, for the first time, light in induced electricity. 
Beginnings of pneumatic chemistry ; observed increase of weight in 
metals from oxydation ; Cardanus and Jean Rey, Hooke and Mayow. 
Ideas on the fundamental part of the atmosphere {spiritus nitro-aSreus), 
which enters into all metallic calxes, and is necessary to all the processes 
of combustion, and the respiration of animals. Influence of physical 
and chemical knowledge on the development of geognosy (Nicolaus 
Steno, Scilla, Lister) ; the elevation of the sea's bottom and of littoral 
districts. In the greatest of all geognostic phenomena — the mathemat- 
ical figure of the earth — we see perceptibly reflected all the conditions 
of a primitive age, or, in other words, the primitive fluid state of the 
rotating mass and its consolidation into a terrestrial spheroid. Meas' 



XVlll SUMMARY OF THE CONTENTS. 

urements of degrees and pendulum experiments in different latitudes. 
Compression. The figure of the earth was known to Newton on theo. 
retical grounds, and the force discovered, of the operation of which tho 
laws of Kepler are a necessary consequence. The discovery of such a 
force, w^hose existence is developed in Newton's imperishable work 
Principia, was nearly simultaneous with the opening of new paths to 
mathematical discovery by the invention of the infinitesimal calculus — 
p. 331-352. 

VIIT. Retrospect, Multiplicity, and intimate Connection existing among 
the Scientific Efforts of Modern Times. — Retrospect of the principal 
momenta in the history of cosraical contemplation connected with great 
events. The multiplicity of the links of connection among the different 
branches of science in the present day increases the difficulty of separ- 
ating and limiting the individual portions — Intellectual activity hence- 
forth produces great results almost without any external incitement, 
and by its own internal power manifested in every directic n. The hi»« 
lory of the physical sciences gradually fuses into that of the idea cf 
Universal Nature— p. 352-356. 



COSMOS, 



PART I. 

INCITEMENTS TO THE STUDY OF NATURE 

THE IMAGE REFLECTED BY THE EXTERNAL WORLD ON THE IMAGIN- 
ATION.— POETIC DESCRIPTION OF NATURE.-LANDSCAPE PAINTING.— 
THE CULTIVATION OF EXOTIC PLANTS, WHICH CHARACTERIZE THE 
VEGETABLE PHYSIOGNOMY OF THE VARIOUS PARTS OF THE EARTH'S 
SURFACE. 

We are now about to proceed from the sphere of objects to 
that of sensations. The main results of observation, which, 
stripped of all the extraneous charms of fancy, belong to the 
purely objective domain of a scientific delineation of nature, 
have been considered in the former part of this work in the 
mutually connected relations, by which they constitute one 
sole picture of the universe. It now, therefore, remains for 
us to consider the impressions reflected by the external senses 
on the feelings, and on the poetic imagination of mankind. 
An inner world is here opened before us, but in seeking to 
penetrate its mysterious depths, we do not aspire, in turning 
over the leaves of the great book of Nature, to arrive at that 
solution of its problems which is required by the philosophy 
of art in tracing aesthetic actions through the psychical powers 
of the mind, or through the various manifestations of intel- 
lectual activity, but rather to depict the contemplation of 
natural objects as a means of exciting a pure love of nature, 
and to investigate the causes which, especially in recent times, 
have, by the active medium of the imagination, so powerfully 
encouraged the study of nature and the predilection for dis- 
tant travels.^ The inducements which promote such con- 
templations of nature are, as I have already remarked, of 
three different kinds, namely, the sBsthetic treatment of nat- 
ural scenery by animated delineations of animal and vegetable 
forms, constituting a very recent ]\ranch of literature ; land- 
scape painting, especially where it has caught the character- 
istic features of the animal and vegetable world ; and tha 
* See vol. i., p, 57. 



20 . COSMOS. 

more widely-difTi^^d cultivation of tropical floras, and the 
more strongly contrasting opposition of exotic and indigenous 
forms. Each of these might, owing to their historical rela- 
tions, be made the object of a widely-extending consideration, 
but it appears to me more in conformity with the spirit and 
aim of this work merely to unfold a few leading ideas, in order 
to remind the reader how differently the aspect of nature has 
acted on the intellect and feelings of different nations at dif- 
ferent epochs, and how, at periods characterized by general 
mental cultivation, the severer forms of science and the more 
delicate emanations of fancy have reciprocally striven to infuse 
their spirit into one another. In order to depict nature in its 
exalted sublimity, we must not dwell exclusively on its extern- 
al manifestations, but we must trace its image, reflected in 
the mind of man, at one time filling the dreamy land of phys- 
ical myths with forms of grace and beauty, and at another 
developing the noble germ of artistic creations. 

In limiting myself to the simple consideration of the in- 
citements to a scientific study of nature, I would not, how- 
ever, omit calling attention to the fact that impressions arising 
from apparently accidental circumstances often — as is repeat- 
edly confirmed by experience — exercise so powerful an effect 
on the youthful mind as to determine the whole direction of 
a man's career through life. The child's pleasure in the form 
of countries, and of seas and lakes,* as delineated in maps ; 
the desire to behold southern stars, invisible in our hemis- 
phere ;t the representation of palms and cedars of Lebanon 
as depicted in our illustrated Bibles, may all implant in the 
mind the first impulse to travel into distant countries. If I 
might be permitted to instance my own experience, and recall 
to mind the source from whence sprang my early and fixed 
desire to visit the land of the tropics, I should name George 
Forster's Delineations of the South Sea Islands, the pictures 
of Hodge, which represented the shores of the Ganges, and 
which I first saw at the house of Warren Hastings, in Lon- 
don, and a colossal dragon-tree in an old tower of the Botan- 
ical Garden at Berlin. These objects, which I here instance 
by way of illustration, belong to the three classes of induce- 

* As the configuration of the countries of Italy, Sicily, and Greece, 
and of the Caspian and Red Seas. See Relation Historique du Voy. aux 
Rigions Equinoxiales, t. i., p. 208. 

♦ Dante, Purg., i., 25-28. 

Goder pareva il ciel di lor fiammelle : 

O settentrional vedovo sito, 

Foi che private se' di mirar quelle I 



DESCRIPTIONS OF NATURE BY THE ANCIENTS. 21 

merits which we have already named, viz., the description of 
nature when springing from an animated impression of terres- 
trial forms ; the delineative art of landscape painting ; and, 
lastly, the direct objective consideration of the characteristic 
features of natural forms. The power exercised by these in* 
citements is, however, limited to the sphere embraced by mod- 
ern cultivation, and to those individuals whose minds have 
been rendered more susceptible to such impressions by a pe 
culiar disposition, fostered by some special direction in the de 
velopment of their mental activity. 



DESCRIPTION OF NATURE.— THE DIFFERENCE OF FEELING EXCITED 
BY THE CONTEMPLATION OF NATURE AT DIFFERENT EPOCHS AND 
AMONG DIFFERENT RACES OF MEN. 

It has often been remarked that, although the enjoyment 
derived from the contemplation of nature was not wholly un- 
known to the ancients, the feeling was, nevertheless, much 
more rarely, and less vividly expressed than in modern times. 
Jn his considerations on the poetry of the sentiments, Schiller 
thus expresses himself:* "If we bear in mind the beautiful 
scenery with which the Greeks were surrounded, and remem- 
ber the opportunities possessed by a people living in so genial 
a climate, of entering into the free enjoyment of the contem- 
plation of nature, and observe how conformable were their 
mode of thought, the bent of their Imaginations, and the hab- 
its of their lives to the simplicity of nature, which was so faith- 
fully reflected in their poetic works, we can not fail to remark 
with surprise how few traces are to be met among them of 
the sentimental interest with which we, in modern times, at- 
tach ourselves to the individual characteristics of natural scen- 
ery. The Greek poet is certainly, in the highest degree, 
correct, faithful, and circumstantial in his descriptions of na- 
ture, but his heart has no more share in his words than if he 
were treating of a garment, a shield, or a suit of armor. Na- 
ture seems to interest his understanding more than his moral 
perceptions ; he does not cling to her charms with the fervor 
and the plaintive passion of the poet of modern times." 

However much truth and excellence there may be in these 

* See Schiller's Sdmmtliche Werlce, 1826, bd. xviii., s. 231, 473, 480, 
486 ; Gervinus, Neuere Gesch. der Poet. National-Litteratur der Deut 
tchen, 1840, bd. i., s. 135 ; Adolph Bekker, in Charikles th. i., s. 219 
Compare, also, Eduard Miiller, Ueber Sophokleische Naturanschauung 
%nd die tiefe Naturempjindung der Oriechen, 1842, s. 10, 26. 



2S COSMOfl. 

remarks, they must not be extended to the whole of antiquity ; 
and I moreover consider that we take a very limited view of 
antiquity when, in contradistinction to the present time, we 
restrict the term exclusively to the Greeks and Romans. A 
profound feeling of nature pervades the most ancient poetry 
of the Hebrews and Indians, and exists, therefore, among na- 
tions of very different descent— Semitic and Indo-Germanic. 

We can only draw conclusions regarding the feelings enter- 
tained by the ancients for nature from those expressions of the 
sentiment which have come down to us in the remains of their 
literature, and we must, therefore, seek them with a care, and 
judge of them with a caution proportionate to the infrequency 
of their occurrence in the grand forms of lyric and epic poetry. 
In the periods of Hellenic antiquity — the flowery season in 
the history of mankind — we certainly meet with the tenderest 
expressions of deep natural emotion, blended with the most 
poetic representations of human passion, as delineating some 
action derived from mythical history ; but specific descriptions 
of nature occur only as accessories, for, in Grecian art, all 
things are centered in the sphere of human life. 

The description of nature in its manifold richness of form, 
as a distinct branch of poetic literature, was wholly unknown 
to the Greeks. The landscape appears among them merely 
as the back-ground of the picture of which human figures con- 
stitute the main subject. Passions, breaking forth into action, 
riveted their attention almost exclusively. An active life, 
spent chiefly in public, drew the minds of men from dwelling 
with enthusiastic exclusiveness on the silent workings of na- 
ture, and led them always to consider physical phenomena as 
having reference to mankind, whether in the relations of ex- 
ternal conformation or of internal development.* It was al- 
most exclusively under such relations that the consideration 
of nature was deemed worthy of being admitted into the do- 
main of poetry under the fantastic form of comparisons, which 
often present small detached pictures replete with objective 
truthfulness. 

At Delphi, paeans to Spring were sung,t being intended, 

* Schnaase, Geschichie der bildenden Kunste bei den Alten, bd. ii., 
1843, 8. 128-138. 

t Plut., de E. L apud Delphos, c. 9 [an attempt of Plutarch's to explain 
the meaning of an inscription at the entrance of the temple of Delphi. 
— TrA. Regarding a passage of Apollonins Dyscolus of Alexandria 
{Mirab. Hist., c. 40), see Otfr. Miiller's last work, Ocsch. der Griech. 
\itterai'ir, bd. i., 1845, s. 31. 



iiESCRIPTIONS OF NATURE BY THE GREEKS. 23 

proDably, to express the delight of man at the termination of 
the discomforts of winter. A natural description of winter is 
interwoven (perhaps by the hand of some Ionian rhapsodist) 
in the Works and Days of Hesiod.* This poem, which is 
composed with noble simplicity, although in accordance with 
the rigid didactic form, gives instructions regarding agriculture, 
directions for different kinds of trade and labor, and ethic pre- 
cepts for a blameless course of life. It is only elevated to the 
dignity of a lyric poem when the poet clothes the miseries of 
mankind, or the exquisite mythical a^Vgory of Epimetheus 
and Pandora, in an anthropomorphic garb. In the theogony 
of Hesiod, which is composed of many ancient and dissimilar 
elements, we frequently find, as, for instance, in the enumer- 
ation of tiie Nereides,! natural descriptions of the realm of 
Neptune tsoncealed under the significant names of mythical 
characters. The Boeotian, and, indeed, all the ancient schools 
of poetry, treat only of the phenomena of the external world, 
under the personification of human forms. 

But if, as we have already remarked, natural descriptions, 
whether they delineate the richness and luxuriance of tropical 
vegetation, or portray the habits of animals, have .only become 
a distinct branch of literature in the most recent times, thif 
circumstance must not be regarded as a proof of the absence 
of susceptibility for the beauties of nature, where the percep- 
tion of beauty was so intense,^ nor must we suppose that the 
animated expression of a spirit of poetic contemplation was 
wanting to the Greeks, who have transmitted to us such in- 
imitable proofs of their creative faculty alike in poetry and in 
sculpture. All that we are led by the tendency of our modern 
ideas to discover as deficient in this department of ancient lit- 
erature is rather of a negative than of a positive kind, being 
evinced less in the absence of susceptibility than in that of 
the urgent impulse to give expression in words to the senti 
raent awakened by the charms of nature. Directed less to 

* Hesiodi Opera et Dies, v. 502-5G1. GSttling, in Hcs. Carm., 1831, 
p. xix. ; Ulrici, Oesch. der Hellenischen Dichtkunst, th. i., 1835, s. 337. 
Bernhardy, Grundriss der Oriech, Litteratur, th. ii., s. 176. According 
to the opinion of Gottfr. Hermann ( Opuscula, vol. vi., p. 239), " the 
picturesque description given by Hesiod of winter bears all the evi- 
dence of great antiquity." 

t Hes., Theog., v. 233-264. The Nereid Mera (Of, xi., 326; H., 
xviii., 48) may perhaps be indicative of the phosphoric light seen on 
the surface of the sea, in the same manner as the same word fialpa des- 
ir^nates the sparkling dog-star Sirius. 

X Compare Jacobs, Leben und Kunsi i.er Alien, bd. i., abth. i., s. vii. 



24 COSMOS. 

the inanimate world of phenomena than to the realities of ac* 
ive life, and to the inner and spontaneous emotions of the 
mind, the earliest, and, at the same time, the noblest direc- 
tions of the poetic spirit were epic and lyric. In these arti- 
ficial forms, descriptions of nature can only occur as incidental 
accessories, and not as special creations of fancy. As the in- 
fluence of antiquity gradually disappeared, and as the bright 
beauty of its blossoms faded, rhetorical figures became more 
and more diffused through descriptive and didactic poetry. 
This form of poetry, wliich in its earliest philosophical, half- 
sacerdotal type, was solemn, grand, and devoid of ornament 
— as we see exemplified in the poem of Empedocles On Na- 
ture — by degrees lost its simplicity and earlier dignity as it 
became more strongly marked by a rhetorical character. 

I may be permitted here to mention a few particular in- 
stances in illustration of these general observations. In con- 
formity with the character of tho Epos, we find the most at- 
tractive scenes of nature introduced in the Homeric songs 
merely as secondary adjuncts. " The shepherd rejoice?* in 
the stillness of night, in the purity of the sky, and in the 
starry radiance of the vault of heaven ; he hears from afar 
the rush of the mountain torrent, as it pursues its foaming 
course swollen with the trunks of oaks that have been borne 
along by its turbid waters."* The sublime description of the 
sylvan loneliness of Parnassus, with its somber, thickly- wooded 
and rocky valleys, contrasts with the joyous pictures of the 
many-fountained poplar groves in the Phseacian island of 
Scheria, and especially of the land of the Cyclops, " where 
meadows waving with luxuriant and succulent grass encircle 
the hills of unpruned vines."t Pindar, in a dithyrambus in 
praise of Spring, recited at Athens, sings of" the earth covered 
with new-born flowers, when, in the Argive Nemsea, the first 
opening shoot of the palm announces the coming of balmy 
Spring." Then he sings of -^tna as "the pillar of heaven, 
the fosterer of enduring snow ;" but he quickly turns away 

* Ilias, viii., 555-559; iv., 452-455; xi., 115-119. Compare, also, 
the crowded but animated description of the animal world, which pre- 
cedes the review of the array, ii., 458-475. 

t Od., xix., 431-445; vi.', 290; ix., 115-199, Compare, also, "the 
verdant overshadowing of the grove" near Calypso's grotto, " whore 
even an immortal would linger v^dth admiration, rejoicing in the beau- 
tiful view," v. 55-73 ; the breaking of the surf on the shores of tha 
Phaeacian Islands, v. 400-442; and the gardens of Alcinoiis, vii., 113- 
130. On the vernal dithyrambus of Pindar, see BOckh, Pindari Opera, 
t ii., part ii... p. 575-579. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF NATURE BY THE GREEKS. 25 

from these terrific forms of inanimate nature to celebrate Hi- 
ero of Syracuse, and the victorious combats of the Greeks with 
the mighty race of the Persians. 

We must not forget that Grecian scenery presents the pe- 
cuhar charm of an intimate association of land and sea, of 
shores adorned with vegetation, or picturesquely girt round by 
rocks gleaming in the light of aerial tints, and of an ocean 
beautiful in the play of the ever-changing brightness of its 
deep-toned moving waves. 

Although to other nations, sea and land, in the different 
pursuits of life to which they give rise, appeared as two sep* 
arate spheres of nature, the Greeks — not only those who in- 
habited the islands, but also those occupying the southern 
portion of the continent — enjoyed, almost every where, the as- 
pect of the richness and sublime grandeur imparted to the 
scenery by the contact and mutual influence of the two ele- 
ments. How can we suppose that so intellectual and highly- 
gifted a race should have remained insensible to the aspect of 
the forest-crowned cliffs on the deeply-indented shores of the 
Mediterranean, to the silent interchange of the influences af- 
fecting the surface of the earth, and the lower strata of the 
atmosphere at the recurrence of regular seasons and hours, or 
to the distribution of vegetable forms ? How, in an age when 
the poetic feelings were the strongest, could this active state 
of the senses have failed to manifest itself in ideal contempla- 
tion ? The Greek regarded the vegetable world as standing 
in a manifold and mythical relation to heroes and to the gods, 
who were siipposed to avenge every injury inflicted on the 
trees and pl/ints sacred to them. Imagination animated veg- 
etable forrt JA with life, but the types of poetry, to which the 
peculiar direction of mental activity among the ancient Greeks 
limited them, gave only a partial development to the descrip- 
tions of natural scenery. Occasionally, however, even in the 
writings of their tragic poets, a deep sense of the beauty of 
nature breaks forth in animated descriptions of scenery in the 
midst of the most excited passions or the deepest tones of sad- 
ness. Thus, when (Edipus is approaching the grove of the 
Eumenides, the chorus sings, " the noble resting-place of the il- 
lustrious Colonos, where the melodious nightingale loves to tar 
ry and pour forth its clear but plaintive notes." Again it sings, 
" the verdant gloom of the thickly-mantUng ivy, the narcissus 
steeped in heavenly dew, the golden-beaming crocus, and the 
hardy and ever fresh-sprouting olive-tree."* Sophocles strives 

* CEcZ. Colon., V. 668-719. Among delineations of scenery, indica- 
Vol. II.— B 



26 COSMOS. 

to extol his native Colonos by placing the lofty form of the 
fated and royal wanderer by the brink of the sleepless waters 
of Cephisus, surrounded by soft and bright scenery. The re- 
pose of nature heightens the impression of pain called forth by 
the image of the noble form of the blind sufferer, the victim 
of mysterious and fatal passion. Euripides* also delights in 
picturesque descriptions of "the pastures ofMessenia and La- 
eonia, which, under an ever-mild sky, are refreshed by a thou- 
sand fountains, and by the waters of the beautiful Pamisos." 

Bucolic poetry, which originated in the plains of Sicily, and 
popularly inclined to the dramatic, has been justly termed a 
transitional form. Its pastoral epics describe on a small scale 
human beings rather than natural scenery ; and in this form 
it appears in its greatest perfection in the writings of Tiieoc- 
ritus. A soft elegiac element is peculiar to the idyl, as if it 
had emanated from " the longing for some lost idea ;" as if, 
in the breast of mankind, a certain touch of melancholy was 
ever mingled with the deep feelings awakened by the aspect 
of nature. 

True Hellenic poetry expired with the freedom of the 
Greeks, and became descriptive, didactic, and instructive. As- 
tronomy, geography, hunting, and fishing were converted, in 
the time of Alexander, into objects of poetic consideration, and 
often adorned with a remarkable degree of metrical skill. The 
forms and habits of animals are depicted with grace, and not 
unfrequently with such accuracy that the particular genera 
or even species may be recognized by the classifying natural- 
ist of the present day. All these compositions are, however, 
wholly wanting in that inner life — that inspired contempla- 
tion of nature — by which the external world becomes to the 
poet, almost unconsciously to himself, a subject of his imagin- 

tive of a deep feeling of nature, I would here further mention the de- 
scription of Cithaeron in the Bacchce of Euripides, v. 1045 (Leake, North. 
Greece, vol. ii., p. 370), where the messenger ascends from the Valley 
of Asopus, the reference to the sunrise in the Valley of Delphos, in the 
Ion of Euripides, v. 82, and the gloomy picture in the Hymn on Delos, 
V. 11, by Callimachus, in which the holy Delos is represented a^ sur* 
rounded by sea-gulls, and scourged by tempestuous waves. 

* According to Strabo (lib. viii., p. 366, Casaub.), who accuses th* 
tragedian of giving a geograffliically incorrect boundary to Elis. This 
beautiful passage of Euripides occui's in the Cresphontes. The descrip- 
tion of the excellence of the district of Messenia is intimately connected 
with the exposition of its political relations, as, for instance, the division 
of the land among the Heraclidse. The delineation of nature is, there- 
fcre, here too, as BOckh ingeniously remarks, associated with humao 
bterests. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF NATURE BY THE GREEKS. 27 

ation. The preponderance of the descriptive element shows 
itself in the forty-eight cantos of the Dionysiaca of the Egyp- 
tian Nonnus, which are remarkable lor their skillfully artist 
ical versification. The poet dwells with pleasure on the de- 
lineation of great convulsions of nature ; he makes a fire kin 
died by lightning on the woody banks of the Hydaspes bum 
up even the fishes in the bed of the river ; and he shows how 
ascending vapors occasion the meteorological processes of the 
storm and electric rain. Although capable of writing roman- 
tic poetry, Nonnus of Panopohs is remarkably unequal in his 
style, being at one time animated and exciting, and at another 
tedious and verbose. 

A deeper feeling for nature and a greater delicacy of sensi 
bility is manifested in some portions of the Greek Anthology, 
which has been transmitted to us in such various ways and 
from such difierent epochs. In the graceful translation of 
Jacobs, every thing that relates to animal and vegetable forms 
has been collected in one section — these passages being small 
pictures, consisting, in most cases, of mere allusions to indi- 
vidual forms. The plane-tree, which " nourishes amid its 
branches the grape swelling with juice," and which, in the 
time of Dionysius the Elder, first penetrated from Asia Minor 
through the Island of Diomedes to the shores of the Sicilian 
Anapus, is perhaps too often introduced ; still, on the whole, 
the ancient mind shows itself more inclined, in these songs 
and epigrams, to dwell on the animal than on the vegetable 
world. The vernal idyl of Meleager of Gadara,. in Coelo-Syr- 
ia, is a noble, and, at the same time, a more considerable com- 
position.* 

* Meleagri Reliquice, ed. Manso, p. 5. Compare Jacobs, Leben una 
Kunst der Alien, bd. i., abth. i., s. xv. ; abth. ii., s. 150-190. Zenobelti 
beheved himself to have been the first to discover Meleager's poem on 
Spring, in the middle of the eighteenth century (Mel. Gadareni in Ver 
Jdyllion, 1759, p. 5). See Brunckii Anal., t. iii., p. 105. There are 
tw^o fine sylvan poems of Marianos in the Anihol. Grceca, ii., 511 and 
512. Meleager's poem contrasts well with the praise of Spring in the 
eclogues of Himerius, a Sophist, who was teacher of rhetoric at Athens 
under Julian. The style, on the whole, is cold and profusely ornate ; 
but in some parts, especially in the descriptive portions, this writer 
Bometimes approximates closely to the modern way of considering na- 
ture. Himerii Sophistcc Eclogce et Declamationes, ed. Wenisdorf, 1790. 
(Oratio iii., 3-6, and xxi., 5.) It seems extraordinary that the lovely 
situation of Constantinople should not have inspired the Sophists. 
(Orat. vii., 5-7 ; xvi., 3-8.) The passages of Nonnus, referred to in the 
text, occur in Dionys., ed. Petri Cunaei, 1610, hb. ii., p. 70; vi., p. 199 j 
xxiii., p. 16 and 619 ; xxvi., p. 694. Compare, also, Ouwaroif, Nonrmn 
9tm Panopolis, der Dichter, 1817, s. 3, 16, 21. 



28 COSMOS. 

On account of the renown attached from ancient times to 
the spot, I would not omit to mention the description of the 
wooded valley of Tempe, as given by ^lian,* probably in im- 
itation of some earlier notice by Dicsearchus. It is the most 
detailed description of natural scenery by any of the Greek 
prose writers that we possess ; and, although topographical 
it is also picturesque, for the shady vale is animated by the 
Pythian procession {thtoria), " which breaks from the sacred 
laurel the atoning bough." In the later Byzantine epoch, 
about the close of the fourth century, we meet more frequently 
with descriptions of scenery interwoven in the romances of the 
Greek pro?e writers, as is especially manifested in the pastor- 
al romance of Longus.t in which, however, the tender scenes 
taken from life greatly excel the expression of the sensations 
awakened by the aspect of nature. 

It is not my object in the present work to extend these ref- 
erences beyond what my own special recollection of particular 
forms of art m.ay enable me to add to these general consider- 
ations of the poetic conception of the external world. I should 
here quit the flowery circle of Grecian antiquity, if, in a work 
to which I have ventured to prefix the title of Cosmos, I could 
pass over in silence the description of nature with which the 
pseudo- Aristotelian book of Cosmos, or Order of the Universe, 
begins. It describes " the earth as adorned with luxuriant 
vegetation, copiously watered, and (as the most admirable of 
all) inhabited by thinking beings. "$ The rhetorical color of 
this rich picture of nature, so totally unlike the concise and 
purely scientific mode of treatment characteristic of the Stag- 
irite, is one of the many indications by which it has been 
judged that this work on the Cosmos is not his composition. 
It may, in fact, be the production of Apuleius,^ or of Chrysip- 

* ^liani Var. Hist, et Fragm., lib. iii., cap. 1, p. 139, Ktthn. Com- 
pare A. Buttmaim, Qucest. dc Diceearcho (Naumb., 1832, p. 32), and 
Geogr. Gr. Min., ed. Gail, vol. ii., p. 140-145 We observe in the tragic 
poet Chaeremon a remarkable love of nature, and especially a predilec- 
tion for flowers, which has been compared by Sir William Jones to the 
sentiments evinced in the Indian poets. See Welcker, Griechische TrU' 
godien, abth. iii., s. 1088. • 

t Longi Pastoralia {Daphnis et Chloe, €d. Seller, 1843), lib. i., 9; 
iii., 12, and iv., 1-3; p. 92, 125, 137. Compare Villemaine, SurlesRo 
mans Grecs, in his Melanges de Littirature, t. ii., p. 435-448, where 
Longus is compared with Bernardin de St. Pierre. 

X Pseudo-Aristot., de Mundo, cap. 3, 14-20, p. 392, Bekker. 

$ See Stahr, Aristoteles bei den Romern, 1834, s. 173-177. Osann, 
Beitrdge zur Griech. und Rom. Litteraturgesckichte, bd. i., 1835, s. 165- 
192. Stahr (s. 172) supposes, like Heuoaaun, that the present Greek if 



DESCRIPTIONS OF NATURE BY THE GREEKS. 29 

pus,* or of any other author. In the place of the passages 
relating to natural scenery, which we can not venture to as- 
cribe to Aristotle, we possess, however, a genuine fragment 
which Cicero has preserved to us from a lost work of Aris- 
totle, f It runs thus : " If there were bemgs who lived in 
the depths of the earth, in dwellings adorned with statues and 
paintings, and every thing which is possessed in rich abund- 
ance by those whom we esteem fortunate ; and if these being? 
could receive tidings of the power and might of the gods, and 
could then emerge from their hidden dwellings through the 
open fissures of the earth to the places which we innabit ; if 
they could suddenly behold the earth, and the sea, and the 
vault of heaven ; could recognize the expanse of the cloudy 
firmament, and the might of the winds of heaven, and admire 
the sun in its majesty, beauty, and radiant effulgence ; and, 
lastly, when night vailed the earth in darkness, they could be- 
hold the starry heavens, the changing moon, and the stars 
rising and setting in the unvarying course ordained from eter- 
nity, they would surely exclaim, ' there are gods, and such 
great things must be the work of their hands.' " It has been 
justly observed that this passage is alone sufficient to corrob- 
orate Cicero's opinion of " the golden flow of Aristotle's elo- 
quence,"! and that his words are pervaded by something of 
the inspired force of Plato's genius. Such a testimony to the 
existence of the heavenly powers, drawn from the beauty and 
stupendous greatness of the works of creation, is rarely to be 
met with in the works of antiquity. 

That which we miss in the works of the Greeks, I will not 
say from their want of susceptibility to the beauties of nature, 
but from the direction assumed by their literature, is still more 
rarely to be met with among the Romans. A nation which, 
in accordance with the ancient Sicilian habits, evinced a de- 
cided predilection for agriculture and other rural pursuits, 
might have justified other expectations ; but, with all their 

an altered translation of the Latin text of Apuleius. The latter saya 
distinctly (^c Mundo, p. 250, Bip.) " that he has followed Aristotle and 
Theophrastus in the composition of his work." 

* Osann, op. cit., s. 194-266. 

t Cicero, de Natura Deorum, ii., 37. A passage in which Sextus Em 
piricus (advcrsns Physicos, lib. ix., 22, p. 554, Fabr.) instances a similar 
expression of Aristotle, deserves the more attention from the fact thai 
the same writer shortly before (ix., 20) alludes to another work of Ar- 
istotle (on divination and dreams) which is also lost to us. 

t " Aristoteles Humen orationis aureum fundens." Cic, Acad. Quasi. 
ii., cap. 38. (Compare Stahr, Aristotelia, th. ii., s. 161. and Aristotelet 
bei den Rdmern, s. 53.) 



30 COSMOS. 

disposition to practical activity, the Romans, with the cold 
severity and practical understanding of their natioi.al charac- 
ter, were less susceptible of impressions of the senses than the 
Greeks, and were more devoted to every-day reality than to 
the idealizing poetic contemplation of nature. These difier- 
ences in the habits and feelings of the Greeks and E-omans 
are reflected in their literature, as is ever the case with the 
intellectual expression of national character. Here, too, we 
must notice the acknowledged difference that exists in the or- 
ganic Ftructure of their respective languages, notwithstanding 
the affinity between the races. The language of ancient La- 
tiurn possesses less flexibility, a more limited adaptation of 
words, a stronger character of "practical tendency" than of 
ideal mobility. Moreover, the predilection evinced in the Au- 
gustan age lor imitating Greek images must have been detri- 
mental to the free outpouring of native feelings, and to the 
free expression of the natural bent of the mind ; but still there 
were some powerful minds, which, inspired by love of coun- 
try, were able by creative individuality, by elevation of 
thought, and by the gentle grace of their representations, to 
surmount all these obstacles. The great poem of nature, 
which Lucretius has so richly decked with the charmus of his 
poetic genius, embraces the whole Cosmos. It has much af- 
finity with the writings of Empedocles and Parmenides, the 
archaic diction of the versification heightening the earnest- 
ness of the descriptions. Poetry is here closely interwoven 
with philosophy, without, however, falling into that frigidity 
of style which, in contrast with Plato's richly fanciful mode 
of treating nature, was so severely blamed by Menander the 
Rhetorician, in the sentence he pronounced on the Hymns of 
Nature. =* My brother has shown with much ingenuity the 
striking analogies and differences which have arisen from the 
amalgamation of metaphysical abstractions with poetry in the 
ancient Greek didactic poems, as in the works of Lucretius, 
and in the episode Bhagavad of th« Indian Epic Mahabhar- 

* Menandri Rhetoris Comment, de Encomiis, ex rec. Heeren, 1785, 
sect, i., cap. 5, p. 38, 39. The severe critic terais the didactic poem 
On Nature a frigid composition {-{pvxpoTEpov), in which the forces of na- 
ture are brought forward divested of their personality — Apollo as light, 
Hera as the concentration of all the phenomena of the atmosphere, and 
Jupiter as heat. Plutarch also ridicules the so-callod poems of nature, 
which have only the foiin of poetry {de And. Poet., p. 27, Steph.). Ac- 
cording to the Stagirite {de Poet., c. i.), Empedocles was more a phys- 
iologist than a poet, and has nothing iu common with Homer but the 
rhythmical measure used by both. 



DESCilIPTIONS OP NATURE BY THE ROMANS, 31 

tbta* The great physical picture of the universe by the Ro- 
man poet contrasts in its cold doctrine of atoms, and in its 
frequently visionary geognostic hypotheses, with his vivid and 
animated delineation of the advance of mankind from the re- 
cesses of the forest to the pursuit of agriculture, to the control 
of natural forces, the more elevated cultivation of mind and 
languages, and through the latter to social civilization.! 
When, in the midst of the active and busy life of the states- 
man, and in a mmd excited by political passion, a keen sus- 
ceptibility for the beauties of nature and an animated love of 
rural solitude stiJl subsists, its source must be derived from the 
depths of a great and noble character. Cicero's writings test- 
ify to the truth of this assertion. As is generally known, 
many points in his book De Legibus, and in that De Oratore, 
are copied from Plato's PhcEdrus ;% yet his delineations of 
Italian nature do not, on that account, lose any of their indi- 
viduality. Plato extols in general terms " the dark shade of 
the thickly-leaved plane-tree ; the luxuriance of plants and 
herbs in all the fragrance of their bloom ; and the sweet sum- 
mer breezes which fan the chirping swarms of grasshoppers." 
In Cicero's smaller sketches of nature we find, as has lately 
been remarked by an intelligent inquirer,^ all things described 
as they still exist in the actual landscape ; we see the Liris 
shaded by lofty poplars ; and as we. descend from the steep 

* " It may appear singular, but yet it is not the less correct, to at- 
tempt to connect poetry, which rejoices every where in variety of form, 
color, and character, with the simplest and most abstract ideas. Poet- 
ry, science, philosophy, and history are not necessarily and essentially 
divided ; they are united wherever man is still in unison with the par- 
ticular stage of his development, or whenever, from a truly poetic mood 
of mind, he can in imagination bring himself back to it." Wilhelm von 
Humboldt, GesammeUe Werke, bd. i., s. 98-102. (Compare, also, Bern- 
hardy, Rom. Litteratur, s. 215-218, and Fried. Schlegel, Sdmmtliche 
Werke, bd. i., s. 108-110.) Cicero {ad Q,vint. fratrem, ii., 11) ascribes, 
if not pettishly, at any rate very severely, more tact than creative talent 
{ingenium) to Lucretius, who has been so highly praised by Virgil, 
Ovid, and Quintilian. t Lucret., lib. v., v. 930-1455. 

X Plato, Pkcedr., p. 230; Cicero, de Leg., i., 5, 15; ii., 2, 1-3; ii., 3, 
0. (Compare Wagner, Comment. Perp., in Cic, de Leg., 1814, p. 6;) 
Cic, deOratore, i., 7, 28 (p. 15, EUendt). 

$ See s. 431-434 of the admirable work by Rudolph Abeken, rectot 
of the Gymnasium at OsnabrUck, which appeared in 1835 under the 
title of Cicero in seinen Briefen. The important addition relative to 
the birth-place of Cicero is by H. Abeken, the learned nephew of the 
author, who was formerly chaplain to the Prussian embassy at Rome 
and is now taking part in the important Egyptian expedition of Profes- 
sor Lepsius. See, also, on the birth-place of Cicero, Valery, Voy. Hist, 
tn Italie, t. iii., p. 421. 



33 COSMOS. 

mountain behind the old towers of Arpinuin, we see the groro 
of oaks on the margin of the Fibrenus, and the island now 
called I&amp;ola di Carndlo, which is formed by the division of 
the stream, and whither Cicero retired, in order, as he said, to 
"give himself up to meditation, reading, and writing." Ar- 
pinum, situated on the Volscian Hills, was the birth-place of 
the great statesman, and its noble scenery no doubt exercised 
an influence on his character in boyhood. Unconsciously to 
himself, the external aspect of the surrounding scenery im- 
presses itself upon the soul of man with an intensity corre- 
sponding to the greater or less degree of his natural suscepti- 
bility, and becomes closely interwoven with the deep original 
tendencies and the free natural disposition of his mental 
powers. 

In the midst of the eventful storms of the year 708 (from 
the foundation of Rome), Cicero found consolation in his villas, 
alternately at Tusculum, Arpinum, Cumsea, and Antium. 
"Nothing can be more delightful," he writes to Atticus,=* 
" than this solitude — ^nothing more charming than this coun- 
try place, the neighboring shore, and the view of the sea. In 
the lonely island of Astura, at the mouth of the river of the 
same name, on the shore of the Tyrrhenian Sea, no human 
being disturbs me ; and when, early in the morning, I retire 
to the leafy recesses of some thick and wild wood, I do not 
leave it till the evening. Next to my Atticus, nothing is so 
dear to me as solitude, in which 1 hold communion with phi- 
losophy, although often interrupted by my tears. I struggle 
as much as I am able against such emotions, but as yet I am 
not equal to the contest." It has frequently been remarked, 
that in these letters, and in those of the younger Pliny, pas- 
sages are met with which manifest the greatest harmony with 
the expressions in use among modern sentimental writers ; for 
my own part, I can only find in them the echoes of the same 
deep-toned sadness which in every age and in every race bursts 
forth from the recesses of the heavily-oppressed bosom. 

Amid the general diffusion of Roman literature, an ac- 
quaintance with the great poetic works of Virgil, Horace, 
and Tibullus is so common, that it would be superfluous to 
dwell on individual examples of the tender and ever wakeful 
sensibility to nature, by which some of these works are ani- 
mated. In Virgil's great epic, the nature of the poem tends 
to make descriptions of scenery appear merely as accessoriea, 

• Cic, Ep. ad Aiticum, xii., 9 and 15. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF NATUU P BY THE ROMANS. 33 

occupying only a very small space. There is no individual 
portraiture of particular localities,* but a deep and intimate 
comprehension of nature is depicted in soft colors. Where, 
for instance, has the gentle play of the waves, or the stillness 
of night been more happily described ? And how well do 
these pleasing pictures contrast with the powerful description 
of the bursting tempest in the first book of the Georgics, and 
the picture in the ^neid of the voyage an I landing at the 
Strophades, the crashing fall of the rock, or the flames emitted 
from Mount iEtna.t 

From Ovid we might have expected, as the fruit of his long 
sojourn in the plains of Tomi, in Lower Moesia, a poetic de- 
scription of the marshes, of which, however, no account has 
been transmitted to us from antiquity. The exile did not 
indeed see that kind of steppe-like plain, which in summer is 
densely covered with juicy plants, varying from four to six feet 
in height, and which in every breath of wind present the as- 
pect of a waving sea of flowering verdure. The place of 
his banishment was a desolate, swampy marsh-land, and the 
broken spirit of the poet, which gives itself vent in unmanly 
lamentation, was preoccupied with the recollection of the en- 
joyments of social life and the political occurrences at Rome, 
and thus remained dead to the impressions produced by the 
contemplation of the Scythian desert, with which he was sur 
rounded. As a compensation, however, this highly-gifted poet 
whose descriptions of nature are so vivid, has given us, besides 
his too frequently-repeated representations of grottoes, springs, 
and " calm moon-light nights," a remarkably characteristic, 
and even geognostically important delineation of a volcanic 
eruption at Methone, between Epidaurus and Troezene. The 
passage to which we allude has already been cited in another 
part of this work.J Ovid shows us, as our readers will re- 

* The passages from Virgil, which are adduced by Malte-Brun (An 
nales des Voyages, t. iii., 1808, p. 235-266) as local descriptions, merely 
show that the poet had a knowledge of the produce of different coun- 
tries, as, for instance, the saffron of Mount Tmolus ; that he was ac- 
quainted with the incense of the Sabeans, and with the true names of 
BDveral small rivers ; and that even the mephitic vapors which rise fron? 
a cavern in the Apennines, near Amsanctus, were not unknown to him. 

t Virg., Georg., i., 356-392; iii., 349-380 ^E»., iii., 191-211; iv.. 
246-251 ; xii., 684-689. 

1: Compare Ovid, Met., I, 568-576; iii., 155-164; iii., 407-412; vii., 
180-188; XV., 296-306; Trist., lib. i., EL 3, 60; lib. iii., El. 4, 49; 
El. 12, 15 ; Ex Ponto, lib. iii., Ep. 7-9, as instances of separate pictures 
of natural scenery. There is a pleasant description of a spring at Hy 
mettuB, beginning with the verse, 

B2 



S4 COSMOS. 

member, *'liow, by the force of the impregnated vapor, tk«9 
earth was distended like a bladder filled with air, or like tho 
^kin of the goat." 

It is especially to be regretted that Tibullus should have 
left no great composition descriptive of the individual charac- 
ter of nature. Among the poets of the Augustan age, he be- 
longs to the few who, being happily strangers to the Alexan- 
drian learning, and devoted to seclusion and a rural life, drew 
with feeling, and therefore with simplicity, from the resources 
of their own mind. Elegies,* of which the landscape onlj 
constitutes the back-ground, must certainly be regarded as 
mere pictures of social habits ; but the Lustration of the 
Fields, and the Sixth Elegy of the first book, show us what 
was to have been expected from the friend of Horace and of 
Messala. 

Lucan, the grgindson of the rhetorician M. AnnsBus Seneca, 
certainly resembles the latter too much in the rhetorical or- 
nation of his diction, but yet we find among his works an ad- 
mirable and vividly truthful picture of the destruction of a 
Druidic forestt on the now treeless shores of Marseilles. The 
half-severed oaks support themselves for a time by leaning tot- 
tering against each other, and, stripped of their leaves, suffer 
the first ray of light to pierce their awful and sacred gloom. 
He who has long lived amid the forests of the New World 
must feel how vividly the poet, with a few touches, has de- 
picted the luxuriant growth of trees, whose colossal remains 
lie buried in some of the turf moors of France. In the di- 
dactic poem oi ^tna by Lucilius the younger, a friend of L. 
Annseus Seneca, we certainly meet with a truthful description 
of the phenomena attending the eruption of a volcano ; but 
the conception has much less of individuality than the work 
entitled ^tna Dialogus,X by Bembo, of which we have al- 
ready spoken in terms of praise. 

"Est prope purpureos colles florentis Hymetti" 

(Ovid, de Arte. Am., iii., 687), which, as Ross has remarked, is one of 
the rare instances that occur of individual delineations of nature refer- 
ring to a definite locality. The poet describes the fountain of Kallia, 
sacred to Aphrodite, so celebrated in antiquity, which breaks forth on 
the western side of Hymettus, otherwise so scantily supplied with wa- 
ter. (See Ross, Letter to Professor Vuros, in the Griech. Medicin. 
ZeUschrift, June, 1837. 

* Tibullus, ed. Voss, 1811, Eleg., lib. i., 6, 21-34; lib. ii., 1, 37-66. 

+ Lucan, Pharg., iii., 400-452 (vol. i., p. 374-384, Weber). 

X The poem of Lucilius, which is very probably a part of a larger 
poetic work, on the natural characteristics of Sicily, was ascribed by 



i^ESCRIPTIONS OF NATURE BY THE ROMANS 85 

When, finally, at the close of the fourth century, the art 
3f poetry, in its grander and nobler forms, faded away, as if 
exhausted, poetic emanations, stripped of the charms of cre- 
ative fancy, turned aside to the barren realities of science and 
of description. A certain oratorical polish of style could not 
compensate for the diminished susceptibility for nature and an 
idealizing inspiration. As a production of this unfruitful age, 
in which the poetic element only appeared as an incidental 
external adornment of thought, we may instance a poem on 
the Moselle by Ausonius. As a native of Aquitanian Gaul, 
the poet had accompanied Valentinian in his campaign against 
the Allemanni. The Mosella, which was composed in ancient 
Treves,* describes in some parts, and not ungracefully, the 
already vine-clad hills of one of the loveliest of our rivers, but 
the barren topography of the country, the enumeration of the 
streams falling into the Moselle, and the characteristic form, 
color, and habits of some of the different species of fish that 
are found in these waters, constitute the main features of this 
wholly didactic composition. 

In the works of the Roman prose writers, among which we 
have already cited some remarkable passages by Cicero, de- 
scriptions of natural scenery are as rare as in those of Greek 
authors. It is only in the writings of the great historians, 
Julius Csesar, Livy, and Tacitus, that we meet with some 
examples of the contrary, where they are compelled to de- 

Wernsdorf to Carnelius Severus. The passages especially worthy of 
attention are the praises of general knowledge considered as " the ft-uits 
of the mind," v. 270-280; the lava currents, v. 360-370 and 474-515; 
the eruptions of water at the foot of the volcano (?), v. 395 ; the forma- 
tion of pumice, v. 425 (p. xvi.-xx., 32, 42, 46, 50, 55, ed. Jacob, 1826). 
* Decii Magni Ausonii Mosella, v. 189-199, p. 15, 44, Bocking. See, 
also, the notice of the fish of the Moselle, which is not unimportant 
with reference to natural history, and has been ingeniously applied by 
Valenciennes, v. 85-150, p. 9-12, and contrast it with Oppian (Bern- 
hardy, Griech. Lilt., th. ii., s. 1049). The Orthinogonia and Thcriaca 
of iEmilius Macer of Verona (imitations of the works of Nicander of 
Colophon), which have not come to us, belonged to the same dry, di- 
dactic style of poetry which treated of the products of nature. A nat« 
Ural description of the southern coast of Gaul, which is to be found iu 
a poetical narrative of a journey by Claudius Rutilius Numatianus, a 
statesman under Honorius, is more attractive than the Mosella of Auso- 
nius. Rutilius, who was driven from Rome by the irruption of the 
Gauls, is returning to his estates in Gaul. We unfortunately possess 
only a fragment of the second book of this poem, and this does not take 
us beyond the quarries of Carrara. See Rutilii Claudii Numatiani de 
Reditu suo (e Roma in Galliam Narbonensem) libri duo, rec. A. W. 
Zumpt, 1840, p. XV., 31-219 (with a fine map by Kiepert). Werns 
dorf, Poeta Lot Min.. t. v.. pt. i., p. 125. 



36 COSMOS. 

Bcribe battle-fields, the crossing of rivers or difficult mountain 
passes in their narrations of the struggle of man against nat- 
ural obstacles. In the Annals of Tacitus, I am charmed with 
the description of the untoward passage of Germanicus over 
the Amisia, and the grand geographical delineation of the 
mountain chains of Syria and Palestine.* Curtius has left 
us a fine natural picture of a woody desert to the west of Hec- 
atompylos, through which the Macedonian army had to pass 
in the marshy region of Mazanderan.f I would refer more 
circumstantially to this passage if our uncertainty as to the 
age in which this writer lived did not prevent our deciding 
what was due to the poet's own imaginiition and what was 
derived from historic sources. 

The great encyclopedic work of the elder Pliny, which, by 
the richness of its contents, surpasses any other production of 
antiquity, will be more fully considered in the sequel, when 
we enter on the " history of the contemplation of the uni- 
verse." The natural history of Pliny, which has exercised a 
powerful influence on the Middle Ages, is, as his nephew, the 
younger Pliny, has elegantly remarked, *' manifold as nature 
Itself" As the creation of an irresistible passion for a com- 
prehensive, but often indiscriminate and irregular accumula- 
tion of facts, this work is unequal in style, being sometimes 
simple and narrative, and sometimes full of thought, anima- 
tion, and rhetorical ornament, and from its very character de- 
ficient in individual delineations of nature ; although, wher- 
ever the connection existing between the active forces of the 
universe, the well-ordered Cosmos {naturce Tnajestas), is made 

* Tac, Ann., ii., 23-24; Hist., v., 6. The only fragment preserved 
by the rhetorician Seneca {Suasor., i., p. 11, Bipont) that we possess 
of a heroic poem, in which Ovid's friend Pedo Albinovanus describes 
the deeds of Germanicus, likewise describes the unfortunate passage of 
the Ems (Fed. Albinov., Elegies, Amst, 1703, p. 172). Seneca con- 
siders this description of the stormy waters as more picturesque than 
any passage to be found in the writings of the other Roman poets. He 
remarks, however, Latini declamatores in Oceani descriptione non nimi* 
viguerunt; nam aut tumide scripserunt aut curiose. 

t Curt., in Alex. Magno., vi., 16. Compare Droysen, Gesch. Alex- 
anders des Grossen, 1833, s. 26.5. In QucEst. Natur., lib. iii., c. 27-30, 
p. 677-686, ed. Lips., 1741, of the too rhetorical Lucius Annseus Sene- 
ca, there is a remarkable description of one of the several instances of 
the destruction of an originally pure and subsequently sinful race, by 
an almost universal deluge, commencing with the words Ciim fatalit 
dies diluvii venerit; and terminating thus: peracto exitio generis huma 
ni extiiictisque pariter feris in quarum homines i7igenia transierant 
See, also, the description of chaotic terrestrial revolutions, in Bhagava 
ta-Purana, bk. iii., c. 17 (ed. Burnouf, t. i., p. 441). 



DESCRIPTIONS OP ^ATURE BY THE ROMANS. 37 

the object of contemplation, we can not mistake the indica- 
tions of a true poetic inspiration. 

We would gladly instance the pleasantly-situated villas on 
the Pincian Hill, at Tusculum and Tibur, on the promontor^ 
of Misenum, and at Puteoli and Baiae, as proofs of a love of 
nature among the Romans, had not these buildings, like those 
of Scaurus and Maecenas, of Lucullus and Adrian, been over- 
stocked with edifices designed for pomp and display ; temples, 
theaters, and race-courses alternating with aviaries, and houses 
for rearing snails and dormice. The elder Scipio had sur- 
rounded his simpler country house at Litumum with towers 
in the castellated style. The name of Matius, a friend of Au 
gustus, has come down to us as that of the person who, m his 
love for unnatural stiffness, first caused trees to be cut in imi- 
tation of architectural and plastic patterns. The letters of 
the younger Pliny give us a charming description of two of 
his numerous villas, Laurentinum and Tusculum.* Although, 
in these two buildings, surrounded by cut box-trees, we meet 
with a greater number of objects crowded together than we, 
with our ideas of nature, would esteem in accordance with 
good taste, yet these descriptions, as well as the imitation oi 
the Valley of Tempo in the Tiburtine villa of Adrian, shoM 
us that a love for the free enjoyment of nature was not whol- 
ly lost sight of by the Roman citizens in their love of art, and 
in their anxious solicitude for their personal comfort in adapt- 
ing the locality of their country houses to the prevailing rela- 
tions of the sun and winds. It is gratifying to be able to add 
that this enjoyment was less disturbed on the estates of Pliny 
than elsewhere by the revolting features of slavery. This 
wealthy man was not only one of the most learned of his age, 

» Plin., Epist., ii., 17 ; v., 6 ; ix., 17 ; Plin., Hist. Nat., xii., 6 ; Hirt, 
Gesch. del Baukunst bei den Alien, bd. ii., s. 241, 291, 376. The villa 
Laurentiim of the younger Pliny was situated near the present Torre di 
Paterno, in the littoral valley of Palombara, east of Ostia. See Viaggio 
da Oslia a la villa di Plinio, 1802, p. 9, and Le Laurentin, by Haudel- 
court, 1838, p. 62. A deep feeling for nature is expressed in the few 
lines wrhich Phny wrote from Laurentinum to Minutius Fundanus: 
'^ Mecum tantum et cum libdlis loquor. Rectam sinceramque vitam! 
dulee otium honestumqiie ! O mare, o littus, verum secretumque [lovaelov ! 
quam multa invemtis, quam multa dictatis .'" (i., 9). Hirt was persuad- 
ed that the origin in Italy, during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, 
of that stitFand systematic style of gardening long known as the French, 
in contradistinction to the freer mode of landscape gardening of the 
English, and the early taste for wearisome and regular lines, is to be 
Mcribed to a wish of imitating that which Pliny the younger has de- 
scribed in his letters (Getchichte der BaukunU bei den Alien, th. f',, » 
866). 



38 COSMOS. 

but he likewise entertained feelings of humane compassion 
for the ens'Javed condition of the people, a sentiment which 
was but seldom expressed in antiquity. On the estates of the 
younger Pliny* no fetters were used ; and the slave was per- 
mitted freely to bequeath, as a cultivator of the soil, that 
which he had acquired by the labor of his own hands.* 

No description has been transmitted to us from antiquity 
of the eternal snow of the Alps, reddened by the evening glow 
or the morning dawn, of the beauty of the blue ice of the gla- 
ciers, or of the sublimity of Swiss natural scenery, although 
statesmen and generals, with men of letters in their retinue, 
rontinually passed through Helvetia on their road to Gaul, 
All these travelers think only of complaining of the wretched- 
ness of the roads, and never appear to have paid any attention 
to the romantic beauty of the scenery through which they 
passed. It is even known that Julius Csesar, when he was 
returning to his legions in Gaul, employed his time while he 
was passing over the Alps in preparing a grammatical work 
entitled De Analogia.] Sihus Italicus, who died in the time 
of Trajan, when Switzerland was already considerably culti- 
vated, describes the region of the Alps as a dreary and barren 
wilderness,! at the same time that he extols with admiration 
the rocky ravines of Italy, and the woody shores of the Liris 
(Garigliano).^ It is also worthy of notice, that the remarka- 
ble appearance of the jointed basaltic columns which are so 
frequently met with, associated in groups, in Central Franco, 
on the banks of the Rhine, and in Lombardy, should never 
have been described or even mentioned by Roman writers. 

At the period when the feelings died away which had anir 
mated classical antiquity, and directed the minds of men to a 
visible manifestation of human activity rather than to a, pas- 
sive contemplation of the external world, a new spirit arose ; 
Christianity gradually diffused itself, and, wherever it was 
adopted as the religion of the state, it not only exercised a 
beneficial influence on the condition of the lower classes by 
inculcating the social freedom of mankind, but also expanded 

* Plin., Epist., iii., 19; viii., 16. 

t Suet., in Julio Ccesare, cap. 56. The lost poem of Ceesar {Iter) 
described the journey to Spain, when he led his army to his last mili- 
tary action from Rome to Cordova by land (which was accomplished 
in tw(mty-four days according to Suetonius, and in twenty-seven days ac- 
cording to Strabo and Appian), when the remnant of Pompey's party, 
which had been defeated in Africa, had rallied together in Spain. 

t Sil. Ital., Punica, lib. iii., v. 477. 

% Id ibid., lib. iv , v. 348; lib. viii., v- 399. 



DESCRIPTIONS OP NATURE IN THE CHRISTIAN FATHERS. 39 

the views of men in their communion with nature. The eye 
no longer rested on the forms of Olympic gods. The fathers 
of the Church, in their rhetorically correct and often poetical 
ly imaginative language, now taught that the Creator showed 
himself great in inanimate no less than in animate nature 
and in the wild strife of the elements no less than in the still 
activity of organic development. At the gradual dissolution 
of the Roman dorriinion, creative imagination, simplicity, and 
purity of diction disappeared from the writings of that dreary 
age, first in the Latin territories, and then in Grecian Asia 
Minor. A taste for solitude, for mournful contemplation, and 
/or a moody absorption of mind, may be traced simultaneously 
ill the style and coloring of the language. Whenever a new 
element seems to develop itself in the feelings of mankind, it 
may almost invariably be traced to an earlier, deep-seated in 
dividual germ. Thus the softness of Mimnermus* has often 
been regarded as the expression of a general sentimental di- 
rection of the mind. The ancient world is not abruptly sep- 
arated from the modern, but modifications in the religious 
eentiments and the tenderest social feelings of men, and changes 
m the special habits of those who exercise an influence on the 
ideas of the mass, must give a sudden predominance to that 
which might previously have escaped attention. It was the 
tendency of the Christian mind to prove from the order of the 
universe and the beauty of nature the greatness and goodness 
of the Creator. This tendency to glorify the Deity in his 
works gave rise to a taste for natural description. The earli- 
est and most remarkable instances of this kind are to be met 
with in the writings of Minucius Felix, a rhetorician and 
lawyer at Rome, who lived in the beginning of the third cen- 
tury, and was the cotemporary of Tertullian and Philostratus. 
We follow with pleasure the delineation of his twilight ram- 
bles on the shore near Ostia, which he describes as more pic- 
turesque and more conducive to health than we find it in the 
present day. In the religious discourse entitled Octavius, wo 
meet with a spirited defense of the new faith against the at- 
tacks of a heathen friend. t 

The present would appear to be a fitting place to introduce 
Bome fragmentary examples of the descriptions of nature which' 
occur in the writings of the Greek fathers, and which are 

•* On elcjnac poeliy, consult Nicol. Bach, in the Allg. Schul-Zeitung, 
1829, abth. ^i., No. 134, s. 1097. 

t Minuch Felicia Octavius, ex. rec. Gron. Roterod., 1743, cap. 2, 3, p 
12.28; cap 16-18, p. 151-171. * . 



40 COSMOS. 

probably less well known to my readers than the evideneei 
afforded by Roman authors, of the love of nature entertained 
by the ancient Italians. I will begin with a letter of Basil 
the Great, for which I have long cherished a special predilec- 
tion. Basil, who was born at Cesarea in Cappadocia, re- 
nounced the pleasures of Athens when not more than thirty 
years old, and, after visiting the Christian hermitages in Ccelo- 
Syria and Upper Egypt, retired, like the Essenes and Thera- 
Deuti before the Christian era, to a desert on the shores of the 
Armenian river Iris. There his second brother* Naucratius 
was drowned while fishing, after having led for five years the 
rigid life of an anchorite. He thus writes to Gregory of Na- 
zianzum, " I believe I may at last flatter myself with having 
found the end of my wanderings. The hopes of being united 
with thee — or I should rather say my pleasant dreams, for 
hopes have been justly termed the waking dreams of men — 
have remained unfulfilled. God has suffered me to find a 
place, such as has often flitted before our imaginations ; for 
that which fancy has shown us from afar is now made mani- 
fest to me. A high mountain, clothed with thick woods, is 
watered to the north by fresh and ever-flowing streams. At 
its foot lies an extended plain, rendered fruitful by the vapors 
with which it is moistened. The surrounding forest, crowded 
with trees of different kinds, incloses me as in a strong for 
tress. This wilderness is bounded by two deep ravines ; on 
the one side, the river, rushing in foam down the mountain, 
forms an almost impassable barrier, while on the other all ac- 
cess is impeded by a broad mountain ridge. My hut is so 
situated on the summit of the mountain that I can overlook 
the whole plain, and follow throughout its course the Iris, 
which is more beautiful, and has a more abundant body of 
water, than the Strymon near Amphipolis. The river of 
my wilderness, which is more impetuous than any other that 
I know of, breaks against the jutting rock, and throws itself 
foaming into the abyss below : an object of admiration to the 
mountain wanderer, and a source of profit to the natives, 
from the numerous fishes that are found in its waters. Shall 

* On the death of Naucratius, about the year 357, 6ee Basilii Magni, 
Op. omnia ed. Par., 1730, t. iii., p. xlv. The? Jewish Essenes. two 
centuries before our era, led an anchorite life on the western shores of 
the Dead Sea, in communion with nature. Pliny, in speaking of them^ 
uses the graceful expression (v. 15), *' mira gens, socia pa'vi^rum.^^ 
The Therapeuti lived originally in monastic communities, in a thaim 
ing district near Lake Mceris (Neander, Allg. Geschichte d^ ( hristL 
Religion und Kirche, bd. i., abtla. i., 1842, 8. 73, 103), 



DESCRIPTIONS OF NATURE IN THE CHRISTIAN FATHERS. 41 

T describe to thee the fructifying vapors that rise from the 
moist earth, or the cool breezes wafted over the rippled face 
of the waters ? Shall I speak of the sweet song of the birds, 
or of the rich luxuriance of the flowering plants ? What 
charms me beyond all else is the calm repose of this spot. It 
is oidy visited occasionally by huntsmen ; for my wilderness 
nourishes herds of deer and wild goats, but not bears and 
wolves. What other spot could I exchange for this ? Alc- 
ma3on, when he had found the Echinades, would not wander 
further."* In this simple description of scenery and of forest 
life, feelings are expressed which are more intimately in uni- 
son with those of modern times than any thing that has been 
transmitted to us from Greek or Roman antiquity. From 
the lonely Alpine hut to which Basil withdrew, the eye wan- 
ders over the humid and leafy roof of the forest below. The 
place of rest which he and his friend Gregory of Nazianzum 
had long desired, is at length found. t The poetic and myth- 
ical allusion at the close of the letter falls on the Christian 
ear like an echo from another and earlier world. 

Basil's Homilies on the Hexsemeron also give evidence of 
his love of nature. He describes the mildness of the con- 
stantly clear nights of Asia Minor, where, according to his ex- 
pression, the stars, " those everlasting blossoms of heaven," 
elevate the soul from the visible to the invisible. $ When, in 
the myth of the creation, he would praise the beauty of the 
sea, he describes the aspect of the boundless ocean plain, in 
all its varied and ever-changing conditions, " gently moved by 
the breath of heaven, altering its hue as it reflects the beams 
of light in their white, blue, or roseate hues, and caressing the 

* Basilii M. Epist., xiv., p. 93; Ep. ccxxiii., p. 339. On the beau- 
tiful letter to Gregory of Nazianzum, and on the poetic frame of mind 
of St. Basil, see Villemain, De V Eloquence Chritienne dans le Quatriime 
Siecle, in his Milanges Historiqnes et Littiraires, t. iii., p. 320-325. 
The Iris, on whose shores the lamily of the great Basil had formerly 
possessed an estate, rises in Armenia, and, after flowing through the 
plains of Pontus, and mingling with the waters of the Lycus, empties 
itself into the Black Sea. 

t Gregory of Nazianzum did not, however, suffer himself to be en- 
ticed by the description of Basil's hermitage, prefenung Ai'ianzus in the 
Tiberina Regio, although his friend had complainingly designated it aa 
an impure (idpadpov. See Basilii Epist., ii., p. 70, and Vita Sancti Bat.f 
p. xlvi. and lix. of the edition of 1730. 

t Basilii HomiL in Hexcem., \i., 1, and iv., 6 ; Bas., Op. Omnia, ed. 
Jul. Garuier, 1839, t. i., p. 54-70. Compare with this the expression 
of deep sadness in the beautiful poem of Gregonub of Nazianzum, bear- 
ing the title On the Nature of Man {Qregor. Naz-, Op. omnia, ed. r&gt;^r., 
1611, t. ii., Carm. xiii., p. SJ'J. 



12 COSMOS. 

Bhores in peaceful sport." We meet with the same senti- 
mental and plaintive expressiorj regarding nature in the writ 
ings of Gregory of Nyssa, the brother of Basil the Great 
" When," he exclaims, " I see every ledge of rock, every val- 
ley and plain, covered with new-born verdure, the varied 
beauty of the trees, and the lilies at my feet decked by nature 
with the double charms of perfume and of color ; when in the 
distance I see the ocean, toward which the clouds are onward 
borne, my spirit is overpowered by a sadness not wholly de- 
void of enjoyment. When in autumn the fruits have passed 
away, the leaves have fallen, and the branches of the trees, 
dried and shriveled, are robbed of their leafy adornments, we 
are instinctively led, amid the everlasting and regular change 
in nature, to feel the harmony of the wondrous powers per- 
vading all things. He who contemplates them with the eye 
of the soul, feels the littleness of man amid the greatness of 
the universe."* 

While the Greek Christians were led by their adoration 
of the Deity through the contemplation of his works to a po- 
etic delineation of nature, they were at the same time, during 
the earlier ages of their new belief, and owing to the peculiar 
bent of their minds, full of contempt for all works of human 
art. Thus Chrysostom abounds in passages like the follow- 
ing : " If the aspect of the colonnades of sumptuous buildings? 
would lead thy spirit astray, look upward to the vault of 
heaven, and around thee on the open fields, in which herds 
graze by the water's side ; who does not despise all the crea- 
tions of art, when, in the stillness of his spirit, he watches 
with admiration the rising of the sun, as it pours its golden 
light over the face of the earth ; when, resting on the thick 
grass beside the murmuring spring, or beneath the somber 
shade of a thick and leafy tree, the eye rests on the far-reced- 
ing and hazy distance ?"t Antioch was at that time sur- 

* The quotation given in the text from Gregory of Nyssa is composed 
of several fragments literally translated. They occur in S. Gregoru 
Nysseni, Op., ed. Par., 1615, t. i., p. 49, C; p. 589, D ; p. 210, C; p. 
780, C ; t. ii., p. 860, B ; p. 619, B ; p. 619, D ; p. 324, D. " Be gentle 
toward the emotions of sadness," says Thalassius, in one of the apho 
risms w^hich were so much admired by his cotemporaries {Biblioth. Pa- 
trum, ed. Par., 1624, t. ii., p. 1180, C). 

t See Joannis Chrysostomi Op. omnia, Par., 1838 (8vo, t. ix., p. 687, 
A; t. ii., p. 821, A, and 851, E; t. i., p. 79). Compare, also, Joannu 
Philoponi in cap. 1, Geneseos de Creaiione Mundi libri septem, Viennae 
Aust., 1630, p. 192, 236, and 272, as also Georgii Pisidce Mundi Opifici 
urn, ed. 1596, v. 367-375, 560, 933, and 1248. The works of Basil and 
of Gregory of Nazianzum soon arrested my attention, after I began to 



DESCRIPTIONS OF NATURE BY THE INDIANS. 43 

oimded by hermitages, in one of which hved Chrysostom. 
It seemed as if Eloquence had recovered' her element, freedom, 
/rom the fount of nature in the mountain regions of Syria and 
Asia Minor, which were then covered with forests. 

But in those subsequent ages — so inimical to intellectual 
culture — when Christianity was diffused among the Germanic 
and Celtic nations, who had previously been devoted to the 
worship of nature, and had honored under rough symbols its 
preserving and destroying j)owers, intimate intercourse with 
nature, and a study of its phenomena were gradually consid- 
ered suspicious incentives to witchcraft. This communion 
with nature was regarded in the same light as TertuUian, 
Clement of Alexandria, and almost all the older fathers of • 
the Church, had considered the pursuit of the plastic arts. 
In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, the Councils of Tours 
(1163) and of Paris (1209) interdicted to monks the sinful 
reading of works on physics.^ Albertus Magnus and Roger 
Bacon were the first who boldly rent asunder these fetters of 
the intellect, and thus, as it were, absolved Nature, and re- 
stored her to her ancient rights. 

We have hitherto depicted the contrasts manifested accord- 
ing to the different periods of time in the closely allied litera- 
ture of the Greeks and Romans. But differences in the mode 
of thought are not limited to those which must be ascribed to 
the age alone, that is to say, to passing events which are con- 
stantly modified by changes in the form of government, social 
manners, and religious belief ; for the most striking differences 
are those generated by varieties of races and of intellectual de- 
velopment. How different are the manifestations of an ani- 
mated love for nature and a poetic coloring of natural descrip- 
tions among the nations of Hellenic, Northern Germanic, Se- 
mitic, Persian, or Indian descent ! The opinion has been re- 
collect descriptions of nature ; but I am indebted to my friend and col- 
league H. Hase, Member of the Institute, and Conservator of the King's 
Library at Paris, for all the admirable translations of Chrysostom and 
Thallasius that I have already given. 

* On the Concilium Tnronense, under Pope Alexander III., see Zie- 
gelbauer, Hist. Rei Litter, ordinis S. Benedicti, t. ii., p. 248, ed. 1754; 
and on the Council at Paris in 1209, and the Bull of Gregory IX., from 
the year 1231, see Jourdain, Recherches Crit. sur les Traductions d^ Ar- 
istote, 1819, p. 204-206. The perusal of the physical works of Aristotle 
was forbidden under penalty of severe penance. In the Concilium La- 
teranense of 1139, Sacror. Concil. nova Collectio, ed. Ven., 1776, t. xxi., 
p. 528, the practice of medicine was interdicted to monks. See, on 
this subject, the learned and agreeable work of the young Wolfgang 
vou G6the. Der Mensch tind die Elementarische Natur, 1844, s. 10 



44 COSMOS. 

peatedly expressed, that the love of nature evinced by northern 
nations is to be referred to an innate longing for the pleasant 
fields of Italy and Greece, and for the wonderful luxuriance 
of tropical vegetation, when contrasted with their own pro 
longed deprivation of the enjoyment of nature during the 
dreary season of winter. We do not deny that this longing 
for the land of palms diminishes as we approach Southern 
France or the Spanish peninsula, but the now generally adopt- 
ed and ethnologically correct term of Indo- Germanic nations 
should remind us that too general an influence ought not to 
be ascribed to northern winters. The luxuriant poetic litera- 
ture of the Indians teaches us that within ar.d near the trop- 
ics, south of the chain of the Himalaya, ever-verdant and ev- 
er-blooming forests have at all times powerfully excited the 
imaginations of the East Arian nations, and that they have 
always been more inclined toward poetic dehneations of nature 
than the true Germanic races who have spread themselves 
over the inhospitable north as far as Iceland. The happier 
climates of Southern Asia are not, however, exempt from a 
certain deprivation, or, at least, an interruption of the enjoy- 
ment of nature ; for the seasons are abruptly divided from 
each other by an alternation of fructifying rain and arid de- 
structive drought. In the West Arian plateaux of Persia, 
the barren wilderness penetrates in many parts in the form 
of bays into the surrounding highly fruitful lands. A margin 
of forest land often constitutes the boundary of these far-ex- 
tending seas of steppe in Central and Western Asia. In this 
manner the relations of the soil present the inhabitants of these 
torrid regions with the same contrast of barrenness and veg- 
etable abundance in a horizontal plane as is manifested in a 
vertical direction by the snow-covered mountain chains of In- 
dia and of Afghanistan. Great contrasts in seasons, vegeta- 
tion, and elevation are always found to be exciting elements 
of poetic fancy, where an animated love for the contemplation 
of nature is closely interwoven with the mental culture and 
the religious aspirations of a people. 

Pleasure in the contemplation of nature, which is consonant 
with the characteristic bent of mind of the Germanic nations, 
is in the highest degfee apparent in the earliest poems of the 
Middle Ages, as may be proved by many examples from the 
chivalric poetry of the Minnesingers, in the period of the Ho- 
henstauffen dynasty. However numerous may be the histor- 
ical points of contact connecting it with the romanesque songs 
of the Proven9als, we can not overlook the genuine Germani&lt;« 



DESCRIPTIONS OF NATURE BY THE MINNESINGERS. 45 

epirit every where breathing through it. A deep and ail-per- 
vading enjoyment of nature breathes through the manners 
and social arrangements of the Germanic races, and through 
the very spirit of freedom by which they are characterized.* 
Although moving and often born in courtly circles, the wan- 
dering Minnesingers never relinquished the habit of commun- 
ing with nature. It was thus that their productions were 
often marked by a fresh, idyllic, and even elegiac tone of feel- 
ing. In order to form a just appreciation of the result of such 
a disposition of mind, I avail myself of the labors of my valued 
friends Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, who have so profoundly 
investigated the literature of our German middle ages. " Our 
national poets during that age," writes the latter of the two 
brother inquirers, " have never devoted themselves to a de- 
scription of nature, having no object but that of conveying to 
the imagination a glowing picture of the scene. A love of 
nature was assuredly not wanting to the ancient German Min- 
nesingers, although they have left us no other expression of 
the feeling than what was evolved in lyric poems from their 
connection with historical events, or from the sentiments ap- 
pertaining to the subject of which they treated. If we begin 
with the oldest and most remarkable monuments of the popu- 
lar Epos, we shall find that neither the Niebelungen nor Gu- 
drun\ contain any description of natural scenery, even where 
the occasion seems specially to prompt its introduction. In 
the otherwise circumstantial description of the hunt, during 
which Siegfried was murdered, the flowering heath and the 
cool spring under the linden are only casually touched upon. 
In Gudi'un, which evinces to a certain extent a more delicate 
finish, the feeling for nature is somewhat more apparent. 
When the king's daughter and her attendants, reduced to a 
condition of slavery, are carrying the garments of their cruel 
masters to the sea-shore, the time is indicated, when the win- 
ter, is just melting away, and the song of rival birds has al- 
ready begun. Snow and rain are falling, and the hair of the 

* Fried. Schlegel, Ueber nordische Dichtkunst, in his Sdmmtliche 
Werke, bd. x., s. 71 and 90. I may further cite, from the very early 
times of Charlemagne, the poetic description of the Thiergarten at Aix, 
inclosing both woods and meadows, and which occurs in the life of the 
great emperor, by Angilbertus, abbot of St. Riques. (See Pertz, ATcmMwi., 
vul. i., p. 393-403.) 

t See the comparison of the two epics, the poem of the Niebelungen 
(describing the vengeance of Chriemhild, the wife of Siegfried), and 
that of Gudrun, the daughter of King Hetel, in Gervinus, Oeschichtg 
der Deutschen Litt., bd. i., s. 354-381. 



i.6 COSMOS. 

maidens is disheveled by the rough winds of March. As Gu 
drun, hoping for the arrival of her liberators, is leaving hei 
couch, and the sea begins to shine in the light of the rising 
morning star, she distinguishes the dark helmets and shields 
of her friends. This description is conveyed in but few words, 
but it calls before the mind a visible picture, and heightens 
the feeling of suspense preceding the occurrence of an import- 
ant historical event. Homer, in a similar manner, depicts 
the island of the Cyclops and the well-ordered gardens of Al- 
cinoiis, in order to produce a visible picture of the luxuriant 
profusion of the wilderness in which the giant monsters dwell, 
and of the splendid abode of a powerful king. Neither of the 
poets purposes to give an individual delineation of nature." 

"The rugg jd simplicity of the popular epic contrasts strong 
ly with the richly-varied narratives of the chivalric poets of 
the thirteenth century, who all exhibited a certain degree of 
artistical skill, although Hartmann von Aue, Wolfram von 
Eschenbach, and Gotfried von Strasburg* were so much dis- 
tinguished above the rest in the beginning of the century, that 
they may be called great and classical. It would be easy to 
collect examples of a profound love of nature from their com 
prehensive works, as it occasionally breaks forth in similitudes ; 
but the idea of giving an independent delineation of nature 
does not appear to have occurred to them. They never ar- 
rested the plot of the story to pause and contemplate the tran- 
quil life of nature. How different are the more modern poetic 
compositions ! Bernardin de St. Pierre makes use of events 
merely as frames for his pictures. The lyric poets of the thir- 
teenth century, when they sang of Minne or love, which they 
did not, however, invariably choose as their theme, often speak 
of the genial month of May, of the song of the nightingale, or 
of the drops of dew glittering on the flowers of the heath, but 
these expressions are always used solely with reference to the 
feelings which they are intended to reflect. In like manner, 
when emotions of sadness are to be delineated, allusion is made 
to the sear and yellow leaf, the songless birds, and the seed 
buried beneath the snow. These thoughts recur incessantly, 
although not without gracefulness and diversity of expression 
The tender Walther von der Vogelweide and the meditative 
Wolfram von Eschenbach, of whose poems we unfortunately 
possess but a few lyrical songs, may be adduced as brilliant 
examples of the cultivators of this species of writing." 

* On the romantic description of the grotto of the lovers, in the Tit9 
tan of Gotfried of Strasburg, see Gervinus, op. cit., bd. i., s. 450. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF NATURE B^S THE MINNESINGERS 47 

" The question, whether contact with Southern Italy, or 
the intercourse opened by means of the crusades with Asia 
Minor, Syria, and Palestine, may not have enriched Germanic 
poetry with new images of natural scenery, must be answered 
generally in the negative, for we do not find that an acquaint- 
ance with the East gave any different direction to the pro- 
ductions of the Minnesingers. The Crusaders had little con- 
nection with the Saracens,"' and differences ever reigned amon^ 
the various nations who were fighting for one common cause. 
One of the most ancient of the lyric poets was Friedrich voi? 
Hausen, who perished in the army of Barbarossa. His song* 
contain many allusions to the Crusades, but they simply ex* 
press religious views, or the pain of being separated from the 
beloved of his heart. Neither he, nor any of those who took 
part in the crusades, as Reinmar the elder, Rubin, Neidhardt, 
and Ulrich von Lichtenstein, ever take occasion to speak of 
the country surrounding them. Reinmar came to Syria as a 
pilgrim, and, as it would appear, in the retinue of Duke Leo- 
pold VI. of Austria. He laments that he can not shake off 
the thoughts of home, which draw his mind away from God 
The date-tree is occasionally mentioned when reference is 
made to the palm-branches which the pilgrims should bear 
on their shoulders. I do not remember an instance in which 
the noble scenery of Italy seems to have excited the imagina- 
tive fancy of the Minnesingers who crossed the Alps. Wal- 
ther von der Vogelweide, who had made distant travels, had, 
however, not journeyed further into Italy than to the Po ; 
but Freidank* had been in Rome, and yet he merely remarks 
that grass grows on the palaces of those who once held sway 
there." 

The German Animal Epos, which must not be confound- 
ed with the " animal fables" of the East, has arisen from 
a habit of 'social familiarity with animals, and not from any 
special purpose of giving a representation of them. This kind 
of epos, of which Jacob Grimm has treated in so masterly a 

* Vridankes Bescheidenheii, by Wilhelm Grimm, 1834, s. 1. and cxxviii 
I have taken all that refers to the German national Epos and the Min 
nesiugers from a letter of Wilhelm Grimm to myself, dated October, 
1845. In a very old Anglo-Saxon poem on the names of the Runes, 
first made known by Hickes, we find the following characteristic de- 
scription of the birch-tree: " Beorc is beautiful in its branches: it rus- 
tles sweetly in its leafy summit, moved to and fro by the breath of 
heaven." The greeting of the day is simple and noble : " The day ia 
the messenger of the Lord, dear to man, the glorious light of God, a 
joy and trusting comfort to rich and poor, beneficent to all i" See, also, 
Wilhelm Grimm, Ueber Deutsche Rimen, 1821, s. 94, 225, and 234. 



48 COSMOS. 

manner in the introduction to his edition of Reinhart Fuchs 
manifests a genuine delight in nature. The animals, not 
chained to the ground, passionately excited, and supposed to 
be gifted with voice, form a striking contrast with the still hfa 
of the silent plants, and constitute the ever-animated principle 
of the landscape. " Ancient poetry delights in considering 
natural life with human eyes, and thus lends to animals, and 
sometimes even to plants, the senses and emotions of human 
beings, giving at the same time a fantastic and child-like in- 
terpretation of all that had been observed in their forms and 
habits. Herbs and flowers that may have been gathered and 
used by gods and heroes are henceforward named after them. 
It seems, on reading the German Anhnal Epos, as if the fra- 
grance of some ancient forest were wafted from its pages."* 

We might formerly have been disposed to number among 
the memorials of the Germanic poetry of natural scenery the 
remains of the Celto-Irish poems, which for half a century 
flitted like vapory forms from nation to nation under the 
name of Ossian ; but the charm has vanished since the literary 
fraud of the talented Macpherson has been discovered by his 
publication of the fictitious Gaelic original text, which was a 
mere retranslation of the English work. There are undoubt 
edly ancient Irish Fingal songs, designated as Finnian, which 
do not date prior to the age of Christianity, and, probably, 
not even from so remote a period as the eighth century ; but 
these popular songs contain little of that sentimental delinea- 
tion of nature which imparted so powerful a charm to the 
productions of Macpherson, f 

We have already observed that, although sentimental and 
romantic excitement of feeling may be considered as in a high 
degree characteristic of the Indo-Germanic races of Northern 
Europe, it can not be alone referred to climate, or, in other 
words, to a longing, increased by protracted deprivation. We 
have already remarked how the literature of the Indians and 
Persians, which has been developed under the genial glow of 
Bouthern climes, presents the most charming descriptions, not 

•* Jacob Grimm, in Reinhart Fuchs, 1834, s. ccxciv. (Compare, 
also, Christian Lassen, in his Indische Alterihumskunde, bd. i., 1843, 
A 296.) 

t {Die Undchtheit der Lieder Ossian' s und des Macpherson'' schen 0#- 
$ian^8 insbesondere, von Talvj, 1840.) The first publication of Os- 
sian by Macpherson was in 1760. The Finnian songs are, indeed, 
heard in the Scottish Highlands as well as in Ireland, but they have 
been carried, according to O'Reilly and Drommoud, from the latter 
country to Scotland 



DESCRIPTIONS OF NATURE BY THE ARIAN RACES. 49 

only of organic, but of inanimate nature ; of the transition 
from drought to tropical rain ; of the appearance of the first 
cloud on the deep azure of the pure sky, when the long-desired 
Etesian winds are first heard to rustle amid the feathery foli- 
age of the lofty palms. 

The present would appear a fitting place to enter somewhat 
further into the domain of Indian delineations of nature. " If 
we suppose," writes Lassen, in his admirable work on Indian 
antiquity,* " that a part of the Arian race emigrated to India 
from their native region in the northwestern portion of the 
continent, they would have found themselves surrounded by a 
wholly unknown and marvolously luxuriant vegetation. The 
mildness of the climate, the fruitfulness of the soil, and its 
rich and spontaneous products, must have imparted a brighter 
coloring to the new life opened before them. Owing to the 
originally noble characteristics of the Arian race, and the pos- 
session of superior mental endowments, in which lay the germ 
of all the nobleness and greatness to which the Indians have 
attained, the aspect of extern il nature gave rise in the minds 
of these nations to a deep meditation on the forces of nature, 
which has proved the means of inducing that contemplative 
tendency which we find so intimately interwoven in the most 
ancient poetry of the Indians. The all-powerful impression 
thus produced on the minds of the people is most clearly 
manifested in the fundamental dogma of their belief — the rec- 
ognition of the divine in nature. The freedom from care, 
and the- ease of supporting existence in such a climate, were 
also conducive to the same contemplative tendency. Who 
could devote themselves with less hinderance to a profound 
meditation of earthly life, of the condition of man after death, 
and of the divine essence, than the anchorites, dwelling amid 
forests,! the Brahmins of India, whose ancient schools consti- 

* Lassen, Ind. Alterthumskunde, bd.i., s. 412-415. 

t Respecting the Indian forest-hermits, Vanaprestiae (Sylvicolse) and 
Sramdni (a name which has been altered into Sarmani and Germani), 
see Lassen, " de nominibus quibus veteribus appellantur Indorum pki- 
losophi" in the Rhein. Museum fur PhUologie, 1833, s. 178-180. Wil- 
helm Grimm recognizes something of Indian coloring in the description 
of the magic forest by a priest named Lambrecht, in the Song of Alex- 
ander, composed more than 1200 years ago, in immediate imitation of 
a French original. The hero comes to a wonderful wood, where 
maidens, adorned with supernatural charms, spring from lar^e flowers. 
He remains so long with them that both flowers and maidens lade awajr. 
(Compare Gervinus, bd. i., s. 282, and Massmann's Denkmdler, bd. i., 
B. 16.) These are the same as the maidens of Edrisi's Eastern magic 
bland of Vacvac, called in the Latin version of the Masudi Chothbeddin^ 
Vol. II.— C 



50 COSMOS. 

tute one of the most remarkable phenomena of Indian life, 
and must have exercised a special influence on the mental 
development of the w^hole race ?" 

In referring here, as I did in my public lectures, under the 
guidance of my brother and other learned Sanscrit scholars, 
to individual instances of that animated and frequently-ex- 
pressed feeling for nature which breathes through the descrip- 
tive portions of Indian poetry, I would begin with the Vedas, 
the most ancient and most valuable memorials of the civiliza- 
tion of the East Arian nations. The main subject of these 
writings is the veneration and praise of nature. The hymns 
of the Rig- Veda contain the most charming descriptions of 
the " roseate hue of early dawn," and of the aspect of the 
** golden-handed sun." The great heroic poems of Ramayana 
and Mahabharata are of more recent date than the Vedas, 
but more ancient than the Puranas ; the adoration of nature 
being associated with the narrative in accordance with the 
character of epic creations. In, the Vedas, the locality of the 
scenes which had been glorified by holy beings was seldom 
indicated, but in the heroic poems the descriptions of nature 
are mostly individual, and refer to definite localities, from 
whence they derive that animation and life which is ever im- 
parted when the writer draws his materials from the impres- 
sions he has himself experienced. There is a rich tone of 
coloring throughout the description of the journey of Rama 
from Ayodhya to the residence of Dschanaka, in his life in 
the primitive forest, and in the picture of the anchorite life of 
the Panduides. 

The name of Kalidasa was early and widely known among 
the Western nations. This great poet flourished in the highly- 
cultivated court of Vikramaditya, and was consequently the 
cotemporary of Virgil and Horace. The English and German 
translations of the Sacontala hav6 added to the admiration 
which has been so freely yielded to this poet,* whose tender- 

puellas VasvaJcienses (Humboldt, Examen Crit. de la Giographie, t. i. 
p. 53). 

* Kalidasa lived at the court of Vikramaditya about fifty-six year 
before our era. It is highly probable that the age of the two great 
heroic poems, Ramayana and Mahabharata, is much more ancient than 
that of the appearance of Buddha, that is to say, prior to the middle ol 
the sixth century before Christ. (Buri.ouf, Bhagavata-Purana, t. i., 
p. cxi. and cxviii.; Lassen, Ind. Alterthnmskunde, bd. i., s. 356 and 492.) 
George Forster, by the translation of Sakuntala, i. e., by his elegant 
German translation of the English version of Sir William Jones (179J X 
contributed very considerably to the enthusiasm for Indian poetry 



NATURAL DESCRIPTIONS BV THE INDIAN?. 51 

ness of feeling and richness of creative fancy entitle hir.i to a 
high place in the ranks of the poets of all nations. The charm 
of his descriptions of nature is strikingly exemplified in the 
beautiful drama of Vikrama and TJrvasi, where the king 
wanders through the thickets of the forest in search of the 
nymph Urvasi ; in the poem of The Seasons ; and in that 
of The Messenger of Clouds (MegJiaduta). This last poem 
describes with admirable truth to nature the joy with which, 
after long drought, the first appearance of a rising cloud is 
hailed as the harbinger of the approaching season of rain 
The expression, " truth to nature," of which I have just made 
use, can alone justify me in referring, in connection with the 
Indian poem of The Messenger of the Clouds, to a picture of 
the beginning of the rainy season, which I sketched* in South 
America, at a period when Kalidasa's Meghaduta was not 
known to me even through the translation of Chezy. The 
mysterious meteorological processes which take place in the 
atmosphere in the formation of vapors, in the form of the 
clouds, and in the luminous electric phenomena, are the same 
between the tropics in both continents ; and the idealizing 
art, whose province it is to exalt reality into a picture, will 
lose none of its charm from the fact that the analyzing spirit 
of observation of a later age may have succeeded in con- 
firming the truthfulness of an ancient and simply graphic 
delineation. 

■ We now turn from the East Arians oi Brahminical In- 
dians, and the marked bent of their minds toward the contem- 
plation of the picturesque beauties of ndiure,t to the West 

which then first showed itself in Germany. I take pleasure in recall 
ing some admirable lines of Gothe's, which appeared in 17.92 : 
" Willst du die Bliithe des friihen, die Fruchte des spateren Jahres, 
Willst du was reizt und entziickt, willst du, was sattigt und nahrt. 
Willst du den Himmel, die Erde mit einem Namen begreifen ; 
Nenn' ich Sakontala, Dich, und so ist alles gesagt." 

The most recent German translation of this Indian drama is that by 
Otto Bohtlingk (Bonn, 1842), from the important original text discovered 
by Brockhaus. 

* Humboldt ( Ueber Steppen und Wusten), in the Ansichten der Natur, 
2te Ausgabe, 1826, bd. i., s. 33-37. 

t In order to render more complete the small portion of the text 
which belongs to Indian literature, and to enable me (as I did before 
with relation to Greek and Roman literature) to indicate the different 
works referred to, I will here introduce some notices on the more gen- 
eral consideration of the love of nature evinced by Indian writers, and 
kindly communicated to me in manuscript by Herr Theodor Gold- 
Btticker, a distinguished and philosophical scholar thoroughly versed in 
Indian poetry : 

"Among all the influeTices affecting the intellectual development of 



62 cos:iios. 

Arians or Persiins, who had separated in different parts of 
the Northern Zend, and who were originally disposed to cora- 

the Indian nation, the first and most important appears to me to have 
been that which was exercised by the rich aspect of the country. A 
deep sentiment for nature has at all times been a fundamental charac- 
teristic of the Indian mind. Three successive epochs may be pointed 
out in which this feeling has manifested itself. Each of these has its 
determined character deeply implanted in the mode of life and tenden- 
cies of the people. A few examples may therefore suffice to indicate 
the activity of the Indian imagination, which has been evinced for 
nearly three thousand years. The first epoch of the expression of a 
vivid feeling for nature is manifested in the Vedas; and here we would 
refer in the Rig- Veda to the sublime and simple descriptions of the dawn 
of day {^Rig-Veda-Saiihitd, ed. Rosen, 1838, Hymn xlvi., p. 88; Hymn 
xlviii., p. 92; Hymn xcii., p. 184; Hymn cxiii., p. 233: see, also, H6 
fer, Ind. Gedichte, 1841, Lese i., s. 3) and of 'the golden-handed sun' 
{Rig-Veda-Sanhitd, Hymn xxii.,p. 31; Hymn xxxv., p. 65). The ad- 
oration of nature which was connected here, as in other nations, with 
an early stage of the religious belief, has in the Vedas a peculiar sig- 
nificance, and is always brought into the most intimate connection with 
the external and internal liftj of man. The second epoch is very differ- 
ent. In it a popular mythology was formed, and its object was to mold 
the sagas contained in the Vedas intt) a shape more easily comprehend- 
ed by an age far removed in character from that which had gone by, 
and to associate them with historical events which were elevated to 
the domain of mythology. The two great heroic poems, the Ramaya- 
na and the Mahabharata, belong to this second epoch. The last-named 
poem had also the additional object of rendering the Brahmins the 
most influential of the four ancient Indian castes. The Ramayana ia 
therefore the more beautiful poem of the two : it is richer in natural 
feeling, and has kept within the domain of poetry, not having been 
obliged to take up elements alien and almost hostile to it. In both 
poems, nature does not, as in the Vedas, constitute the whole picture, 
but only a part of it. Two points essentially distinguish the conception 
of nature at the period of the heroic poems from that which the Vedas 
exhibit, without reference to the difference which separates the lan- 
guage of adoration from that of narrative. One of these points is the lo- 
calization of the descriptions, as, for instance, according to Wilhelm von 
Schlegel, in the first book of the Ramayana or Balakanda, and in the 
second book, or Ayodhyakanda. See, also, on the differences between 
these two great epics, Lassen, Ind. Alter thumskunde, bd. i., s. 482. 
The next point, closely connected with the first, refers to the subject 
which has enriched the natural description. Mythical narration, espe- 
cially when of a historical character, necessarily gave rise to greater 
distinctness and localization in the description of nature. All the writ- 
ers of great epics, whether it be Valmiki, who sings the deeds of Rama, 
or the authors of the Mahabharata, who collected the national tradi- 
tions under the collective title of Vyasa, show themselves overpowered, 
is it were, by emotions connected with their descriptions of external 
nature. Rama's journey from Ayodhya to Dschanaka's capital, his life 
in the forest, his expedition to Lanka (Ceylon), where the savage Ra- 
vana, the robber of his bride, Sita, dwells, and the hermit life of th» 
Panduides, furnish the poet with the opportunity of following the orig- 
inal bent of the Indian mind, and of blending with tb&gt;^ narration of h»- 



NATURAL DESCRIPTIONS BY THE INDIANS. 53 

bine a spiritualized adoration of nature with the dua.lis.ic be 
lief in Ahrimanes and Ormuzd. What we usually term Per 

roic deeds the rich pictures of a luxuriant nature. {Ramayana, ed, 
Schlegel, lib. i., cap. 26, v. 13-15; lib. ii., cap. 56, v. 6-11: compare 
Nalus, ed. Bopp, 1832, iSes., xii., v. 1-10.) Another point in which 
the second epoch differs from that of the Vedas in regard to the feehng 
for external nature is in the greater richness of the subject treated of, 
which is not, like the first, limited to the phenomena of the heavenly 
powers, but comprehends the wliole of nature — the heavens and the 
earth, with the world of plants and of animals, in all its luxuriance and 
variety, and in its influence on the mind of men. In the third epoch 
of the poetic literature of India, if we except the Puranas, which have 
the particular object of developing the religious principle in the minds 
of the different sects, external nature exercises undivided sway, but the 
descriptive portion of the poems is based on scientific and local observ- 
ation. By way of specifying some of the great poems belonging to this 
epoch, we will mention the Bhatti-kdvya (or Bhatti's poem), which, 
like the Ramayana, has for its subject the exploits and adventures of 
Rama, and in which there occur successively several admirable descrip- 
tions of a forest life during a term of banishment, of the sea and of its 
beautiful shores, dnd of the breaking of the day in Ceylon (Lanka). 
{Bhatti-kdvya, ed. Calc, Part i., canto vii., p. 432; canto x., p. 715; 
canto xi., p. 814. Compare, also. Fiinf Gesdnge des Bhatti-kdvya, 1837, 
s. 1-18, by Professor Schiitz of Bielefeld; the agreeable description of 
the different periods of the day in Magha's Sisiepalabdha, and the Nais- 
chada-ischarita of Sri Harscha, where, however, in the story of Nalus 
and Damayanti, the expression of the feeling for external nature passes 
into a vague exaggeration. This extravagance contrasts with the noble 
simplicity of the Ramayana, as, for instance, where Visvamitra is de- 
scribed as leading his pupil to the shores of the Sona. {Sisvpaladha, 
ed. Calc, p. 298 and 372. Compare Schiitz, op. cit., s. 25-28; Nais 
chada-tscharita, ed. Calc, Part i., v. 77-129 ; and Ramayana, ed. Schle- 
gel, lib. i., cap. 35, v. 15-18.) Kalidasa, the celebrated author o{ Sa- 
kuntala, has a masterly manner of representing the influence which the 
aspect of nature exercises on the minds and feelings of lovers. The 
forest scene which he has portrayed in the drama of Vikrama and Ur- 
vasi may rank among the finest poetic creations of any period. ( Vi- 
kramorvasi, ed. Calc, 1830, p. 71; see the translation in Wilson's Se- 
lect Specimens of the Theater of the Hindus, Calc, 1827, vol. ii., p. 63.) 
Particular reference should be made in the poem of The Seasons to the 
passages referring to the rainy season and to spring. (Ritusanhdra, ed. 
Bohlen, 1840, p. 11-18 and 37-45, and s. 80-88, 107-114 of Bohlen's 
translation.) In the Messenger of Cloudg, likewise the work of Kali- 
dasa, the influence of external nature on the feelings of men is also the 
leading subject of the composilion. This poem (the Meghaduta, or 
Messenger of Clouds, which has been edited by Gildemeister and Wil- 
son, and translated both by Wilson and by Chezy) describes the grief of 
an exile on the mountain Ramagiri. In his longing for the presence of 
his beloved, from whom he is separated, he entreats a passing cloud 
to convey to her tidings of his sorrows, and describes to the cloud the 
path which it must pursue, depicting the landscape as if would be re- 
flected in a mind agitated with deep emotion. Among the treasures 
which the Indian poetry of the third period owes to tht, influence of 
nature on the national mind, the highest praise must be awarded to tli€ 



54 COSMOS. 

sian literature does not go further back than the time of the 
Sassanides ; the most ancient monuments of their poetry have 
perished. It was not until the country had been subjugated 
by the Arabs, and had lost its original characteristics, that it 
again acquired a national literature among the Samanides, 
Gaznevides, and Seldschukes. The flourishing period of their 
poetry, extending from Firdusi to Hafiz and Dschami, scarce- 
ly lasted more than four or five hundred years, and hardly 
reaches to the time of the voyage of Vasco de Gama. We 
must not forget, in seeking to trace the love of nature evinced 
by the Indians and Persians, that these nations, if we judge 
according to the amount of cultivation by which they are re- 
spectively characterized, appear to be separated alike by time 
and space. Persian literature belongs to the Middle Ages, 
while the great literature of India appertains in the strictest 
sense to antiquity. 

In the Iranian elevated plateaux nature has not the same 
luxuriance of arborescent vegetation, or the remarkable divers- 
ity of form and color, by which the soil of Hindostan is em- 
bellished. The chain of the Vindhya, which long continued 
to be the boundary line of the East Arian nations, falls with- 
in the tropical region, while the whole of Persia is situated 
beyond the tropics, and a portion of its poetry belongs leven to 
the northern districts of Balkh and Fergana. 

The four paradises celebrated by the Persian poets* were 
the pleasant valley of Soghd near Samarcand, Maschanrud 
near Hamadan, Scha'abi Bowan near Kal'eh Sofid in Fars, 
and Ghute, the plain of Damascus. Both Iran and Turan 
are wanting in woodland scenery, and also, therefore, in the 
hermit life of the forest, which exercised so powerful an influ- 
ence on the imagination of the Indian poets. Gardens re- 
freshed by cool springs, and filled with roses and fruit-trees, 
can form no substitute for the wild and grand natural scenery 
of Hindostan. It is no wonder, then, that the descriptive 
poetry of Persia was less fresh and animated, and that it was 

Gitagovinda of Dschayadeva. (Riickert, in the Zeitschrift fur die 
Kunde des Morgenlandes, bd. i., 1837, s. 129-173; Gitagovinda Jaya- 
devce poetcz indici drama lyricum, ed. Chr. Lassen, 1836.) We possess 
a masterly rhythmical translation of this poem, by RQckert, which ia 
one of the most pleasing, and. at the same time, one of the most diffi- 
cult in the whole literature of the Indians. The spirit of tlie original 
is rendered with admirable fidelity, while a vivid conception of natura 
animates every part of this great composition." 

* Journal of the Royal Geogr. Soc. of London, vol. x. 1841, p. ^, 3 
^Ockert, Makamen HanrVs, s. 261. 



NATURAL DESCRIPTIONS IN THE PERSIAN WRITERS. 55 

often heavy and overcharged with artificial adornment. If, 
in accordance with the opinion of the Persians themselves, 
we award the highest praise to that which we may designate 
by the terms spirit and wit, we must limit our admiration to 
the productiveness of the Persian poets, and to the infinite di- 
versity of forms imparted to the materials which they employ ; 
depth and earnestness of feeling are wholly absent from their 
writings.* 

Descriptions of natural scenery do but rarely interrupt the 
narrative in the historical or national Epos of Firdusi. It 
seems to me that there is much beauty and local truthfulness 
in the description of the mildness of the climate and the force 
of the vegetation, extolled in the praise of the coast-land of 
Mazanderan, which is put into the mouth of a wandering 
bard. The king, Kei Kawus, is represented as being excited 
by this praise to enter upon an expedition to the Caspian Sea, 
and even to attempt a new conquest. f The poems on Spring 
by Enweri, Dschelaleddin Rumi (who is esteemed the greatest 
mystic poet of the East), Adhad, and the half-Indian Feisi, 
generally breathe a tone of freshness and life, although a pet- 
ty striving to play on words not unfrequently jars unpleasant- 
ly on the senses. J As Joseph von Hammer has remarked, in 
his great work on the history of Persian poetry, Sadi, in his 
JBosiati and Gulistan (Fruit and Rose Gardens), may be re- 
garded as indicating an age of ethical teaching, while Hafiz, 
whose joyous views of life have caused him to be compared 
to Horace, may be considered by his love-songs as the type of 
a high development of lyrical art ; but that, in both, bom- 
bastic affectation too frequently mars the descriptions of na- 
ture. ^ The darhng subject of Persian poetry, the "loves of 

* G5the, in his Commentar zum wesi-osilichen Divan, bd. vi., 1828, 
v73, 78, and HI. 

t See Le Livre des Rois, public par Jules Mohl, t. i., 1838, p. 487. 

X See Jos. von Hammer, Gcsch. der schonen Redekunste Persiens, 
1818, s. 96, concerning Ewhadeddin Enweri, who lived in the twelfth 
lentury, and in whose poem on the Schedschai a remarkable allusion 
tias been discovered to the mutual attraction of the heavenly bodies; s. 
183, concerning Dschelaleddin Rumi, the mystic; s. 259, concerniiig 
Dschelaleddin Ahdad; and 8. 403, concerning Feisi, who stood forth at 
Ihe court of Akbar as a defender of the religion of Brahma, and in whoso 
OhazuU there breathes an Indian tenderness of feeling. 

$ " Night comes on when the ink-bottle of heaven is overturned," is 
ihe inelegant expression of Chodschah Abduiia VVassaf, a poet who has, 
however, the merit of having been the first to describe the great as- 
tronomical observatory of Meragha, with its lofty gnomon. Hilali, of 
Asterabad, makes the disk of the moon glow with heat, and regards 



56 COSMOS. 

the nightingale and the rose," recurs with wearying frequency, 
and a genuine love of nature is lost in the East amid the art- 
ificial conventionalities of the language of flowers. 

On passing northward from the Iranian plateaux through 
Turan (Tuirja* in the Zend) to the Uralian Mountains, which 
separate Europe and Asia, we arrive at the primitive seat of 
the Finnish race ; for the Ural is as much a land of the an- 
cient Fins as the Altai is of the ancient Turks. Among the 
Finnish tribes who have settled far to the west in the low- 
lands of Europe, Elias Lonnrot has collected from the lips of 
the Karelians, and the country people of Olonetz, a large 
number of Finnish songs, in which " there breathes," accord- 
ing to the expression of Jacob Grimm, " an animated love of 
nature rarely to be met with in any poetry but that of India. "t 
An ancient Epos, containing nearly three thousand verses, 
treats of a fight between the Fins and Laps, and the fate of a 
demi-god named Vaino. It gives an interesting account of 
Finnish country life, especially in that portion of the work 
where Ilmarine, the wife of the smith, sends her flocks into 
the woods, and offers up prayers for their safety. Few races 
exhibit greater or more remarkable differences in mental cul- 
tivation, and in the direction of their feelings, according ai 
they have been determined by the degeneration of servitude, 
warlike ferocity, or a continual striving for political freedom, 
than the Fins, who have been so variously subdivided, al- 
though retaining kindred languages. In evidence of this, we 
need only refer to the now peaceful population among whom 
the Epos above referred to was found ; to the Huns, once cel- 
ebrated for conquests that disturbed the then existing order of 
things, and who have long been confounded with the Monguls ; 
and, lastly, to a great and noble people, the Magyars. 

After having considered the extent to which intensity in 
the love of nature and animation in the mode of its expression 
may be ascribed to differences of race, to the peculiar influ- 
ence of the configuration of the soil, the form of government, 
and the character of religious belief, it now remains for us to 
throw a glance over those nations of Asia who offer the 

the evening dew as " the sweat of the moon." (Jos. von Hammer, s. 
247 and 371.) 

* Ttiirja or Turan are names whose etymology is still unknown. 
Barnouf( Facna, t. i., p. 427-430) has acutely called attention to the 
Bactrian satrapy of Turiua or Turiva, mentioned in Strabo (lib. xi., p. 
517, Cas.). Du Theil and Groskurd would, however, sibstit, to lh« . 
reading of Tapyria. See the work of the latter, th. ii., s. 410. 

+ Ueber ein Finnisches Epos, Jacob Grimm, 1845, s. 5. 



NATURAL DESCRIPTIONS IN THE HEBREW WRITERS. 57 

strongest contrast to the Arian or Indo-Germanic races, or, in 
other words, to the Indians and Persians. 

The Semitic or Aramseic nations afford evidence of a pro- 
found sentiment of love for nature in the most ancient and 
venerable monuments of their poetic feeling and creative fan- 
cy. This sentiment is nobly and vividly manifested m their 
pastoral effusions, in their hymns and choral songs, in all the 
splendor of lyric poetry in the Psalms of David, and in the 
schools of the seers and prophets, whose exalted inspiration, 
almost wholly removed from the past, turns its prophetic as- 
pirations to the future. 

The Hebraic poetry, besidesall its innate exalted sublimity, 
presents the nations of the West with the special attraction 
of being interwoven with numerous reminiscences connected 
with the local seat of the religion professed by the followers 
of the three most widely-diffused forms of belief, Judaism, 
Christianity, and Mohammedanism. Thus missions, favored 
by the spirit of commerce, and the thirst for conquest evinced 
by maritime nations, have combined to bear the geographical 
names and natural descriptions of the East as they are preserved 
to us in the books of the Old Testament, far into the forests of 
the New World, and to the remote islands of the Pacific. 

It is a characteristic of the poetry of the Hebrews, that, as 
a reflex of monotheism, it always embraces the universe in its 
unity, comprising both terrestrial life and the luminous realms 
of space. It dwells but rarely on the individuality of phe- 
nomena, preferring the contemplation of great masses. The 
Hebrew poet does not depict nature as a self-dependent object, 
glorious in its individual beauty, but always as in relation and 
subjection to a higher spiritual power. Nature is to him a 
work of creation and order, the living expression of the omni- 
presence of the Divinity in the visible world. Hence the lyr- 
ical poetry of the Hebrews, from the very nature of its subject, 
is grand and solemn, and when it treats of the earthly condi- 
tion of mankind, is full of sad and pensive longing. It is 
worthy of remark, that Hebrew poetry, notwithstanding its 
grandeur, and the lofty tone of exaltation to which it is often 
elevated by the charm of music, scarcely ever loses the re- 
straint of measure, as does the j.oetry of India. Devoted to 
the pure contemplation of the Divinity, it remains clear and 
simple in the midst of the most figurative forms of expression, 
delighting in comparisons which recur with almost rhythmic 
al regularity. 

As descriptions of nature, the writings of the Old Testa 
C 2 



58 COSMOS. 

ment are a faithful reflection of the character of the country 
in which they were composed, of the alternations of barren- 
ness and fruitfulness, and of the Alpine forests by which the 
land of Palestine was characterized. They describe in theii 
regular succession the relations of the climate, the manners 
of this people of herdsmen, and their hereditary aversion to 
agricultural pursuits. The epic or historical narratives are 
marked by a graceful simplicity, almost more unadorned than 
those of Herodotus, and most true to nature ; a point on which 
the unanimous testimony of modern travelers may be received 
as conclusive, owing to the inconsiderable changes effected in 
the course of ages in the manners and habits of a nomadic 
people. Their lyrical poetry is more adorned, and develops a 
rich and animated conception of the hfe of nature. It might 
almost be said that one single psalm (the 104th) represents 
the image of the whole Cosmos : " Who coverest thyself with 
light as with a garment : who stretchest out the heavens like 
a curtain : who layeth the beams of his chambers in the wa- 
ters : who maketh the cfouds his chariot : who walketh upon 
the wings of the wind : who laid the foundations of the earth, 
that it should not be removed forever. He sendeth the springs 
into the valleys, which run among the hills. They give drink 
to every beast of the field : the wild asses quench their thirst. 
By them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation', 
which sing among the branches. He causeth the grass to 
grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of man : that he 
may bring forth food out of the earth ; and wine that maketh 
glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face shine, and 
bread which strengtheneth man's heart. The trees of the 
Lord are full of sap ; the cedars of Lebanon which he hath 
planted ; where the birds make their nests : as for the stork, 
the fir-trees are her house." " The great and wide sea" is 
then described, "wherein are things creeping innumerable, 
both small and great beasts. There go the ships : there is 
that leviathan, whom thou hast made to play therein." The 
description of the heavenly bodies renders this picture of na- 
ture complete : *' He appointed the moon for seasons : the sun 
knoweth his going down. Thou makest darkness, and it is 
night ; wherein all the beasts of the forest do creep forth. 
The "young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat 
from God. The sun ariseth, they gather themselves together, 
and lay them down in their dens. Man goeth forth unto his 
•work and to his labor unto the evening." 

We are astonished to find, in a lyrical poem of such a lim- 



HEBREW POETRY. 59 

rtod compass, the M'hole universe — the heavens and the earth 
— sketched vvath a few bold touches. The calm and toilsome 
labor of man, from the rising of the sun to the setting of the 
same, when his daily work is done, is here contrasted with 
the moving life of the elements of nature. This contrast and 
generalization in the conception of the mutual action of natu« 
ral phenomena, and this retrospection of an omnipresent invis- 
ible powei:. which can renew the earth or crumble it to dust, 
constitute a solemn and exalted rather than a glowing and 
gentle form, of poetic creation. 

Similar views of the Cosmos occur repeatedly in the Psalms* 
(Psalm Ixv., 7-14, and Ixxiv., 15-17), and most fully, per- 
haps, in the 37th chapter of the ancient, if not ante-Mosaic 
Book of Job. The meteorological processes which take place 
in the atmosphere, the formation and solution of vapor, ac- 
cording to the changing direction of the wind, the play of its 
colors, the generation of hail and of the rolling thunder, are 
described with individualizing accuracy ; and many questions 
are propounded which we in the present state of our physical 
knowledge may indeed be able to express under more scien- 
tific definitions, but scarcely to answer satisfactorily. The 
Book of Job is generally regarded as the most perfect speci- 
men of the poetry of the Hebrews. It is alike picturesque in 
the delineation of individual phenomena, and artistically skill- 
ful in the didactic arrangement of the whole work. In all 
the modern languages into which the Book of Job has been 
translated, its images, drawn from the natural scenery of the 
East, leave a deep impression on the mind. " The Lord 
walketh on the heights of the waters, on the ridges of the 
waves towering high beneath the force of the wind." " The 
morning red has colored the margins of the earth, and vari 
ously formed the covering of clouds, as the hand of man molds 
the yielding clay." The habits of animals are described, as, 
for instance, those of the wild ass, the horse, the buffalo, the 
rhinoceros, and the crocodile, the eagle and the ostrich. We 
see " the pure ether spread, during the scorching heat of the 
south wind, as a melted mirror over the parched desert. "t 

* Noble echoes of the ancient Hebraic poetry are found in the elev- 
enth century, in the hymns of the Spanish Synagogue poet, Salomo ben 
Jehudah Gabirol, which contain a poetic paraphrase of the pseudo-Ar- 
istotelian book, De Mundo. See Die Religiose Poesie der Juden in 
Spanien, by Michael Sachs, 1845, s. 7, 217, and 22^. The sketches, 
drawn from nature, and found in the writings of Mose ben Jakob ben 
Esra (s. 69, 77, and 285), are full of vigor and grandeur. 

t I have taken the passages in the Book of Job from the translation 



60 C0.BM03. 

Where nature has but sparingly bestowed her gifts, the senses 
of man are sharpened, and he marks every change in the mov- 
ing clouds of the atmosphere around him, tracing in the soli- 
tude of the dreary desert, as on the face of the deep and mov- 
ing sea, every phenomenon through its varied changes, back 
to the signs by which its coming was proclaimed. The cli- 
mate of Palestine, especially in the arid and rocky portions of 
the country, is peculiarly adapted to give rise to such observ- 
ations. 

The poetic literature of the Hebrews is not deficient in va- 
riety of fonn ; for while the Hebrew poetry breathes a tone 
of warlike enthusiasm from Joshua to Samuel, the little book 
of the gleaner Ruth presents us with a charming and exqui- 
sitely simple picture of nature. Gothe,* at the period of his 
enthusiasm for the East, spoke of it " as the loveliest speci- 
men of epic and idyl poetry which we possess." 

Even in more recent times, we observe in the earliest lit- 
erature of the Arabs a faint reflection of that grand, contem- 
plative consideration of nature which was an original charac- 
teristic of the Semitic races. I would here refer to the pic- 
turesque delineation of Bedouin desert life, which the gram- 
marian Asmai has associated with the great name of Antar, 
and has interwoven with other pre-Mohammedan sagas of 
heroic deeds into one great work. The principal character in 
this romantic novel is the Antar (of the race of Abs, and son 
of the princely leader Scheddad and of a black slave), whose 
verses have been preserved among the prize poems {Moalla- 
kat) hung up in the Kaaba. The learned English translator, 
Terrick Hamilton, has remarked the Biblical tone which 
breathes through the style of Antar.f Asmai makes the son 

and exposition of Umbreit (1824), s. xxix.-xlii., and 290-314. (Com- 
pare, generally, Gesenius, Geschichte der Hebr. Sprache und Schrift, s. 
33 ; and Johi Antiquissimi Carminis Hebr. Natura atque Virtutes, ed. 
Ilgen, p. 28.) The longest and most characteristic description of an an- 
imal which we meet with in Job is that of the crocodile (xl., 25 — xli., 
26), and yet it contains one of the evidences of the wiiter being him- 
self a native of Palestine. (Umbreit, s. xli. and 308.) As the river- 
horse of the Nile and the crocodile were formerly found throughout the 
whole Delta of the Nile, it is not surprising that the knowledge of such 
strangely-formed animals should have spread into the contiguous region 
of Palestine. 

* Gothe, in his Commentar zum west-ostlichen Divan, s. 8. 

t Antar, a Bedouin romance, translated from the Arabic by Terrick 
Hamilton, vol. i., p. xxvi. ; Hammer, in the Wiener Jakrbuchern der 
Litteratur, bd. vi., 1819, s. 229 ; RosenmUller, in the Charakteren def 
vornehmsten Dichter alter Nationen, bd. v. (1798), s. 251. 



LITERATURE OF THE ARABS. 61 

of the desert go to Constantinople, and thus a picturesque 
contrast of Greek culture and nomadic ruggedness is intro- 
duced. The small space occupied in the earliest Arabic 
poems by natural delineations of the country will excite but 
little surprise when we remember, as has been remarked by 
my friend Freytag of Bonn, who is so celebrated for his knowl- 
edge of this branch of literature, that the principal subjects 
of these poems are narrations of deeds of arms, and praise of 
hospitality and fidelity, and that scarcely any of the bards 
were natives of Arabia Felix. A wearying uniformity of 
grassy plains and sandy deserts could not excite a love of na- 
ture, except under peculiar and rare conditions of mind. 

Where the soil is not adorned by woods and forests, the 
phenomena of the atmosphere, as winds, storms, and the long- 
wished-for rain, occupy the mind more strongly, as we have 
already remarked. For the sake of referring to a natural im- 
age of this kind in the Arabian poets, I would especially no- 
tice Antar's Moallakat, which describes the meadows ren- 
dered fruitful by rain, and visited by swarms of buzzing in- 
sects ;* the fine description of storms in Amru'l Kais, and in 
the seventh book of the celebrated Hamasa;\ and, lastly, the 
picture in the Nabegha Dhobyaoii of the rising of the Eu- 
phrates, when its waves bear in their course masses of reeds 
and trunks of trees. f The eighth book of HaTuasa^ inscribed 
"Travel and Sleepiness," naturally attracted my special at- 
tention ; I soon found, however, that " sleepiness" § was lim- 
ited to the first fragment of the book, and that the choice of 
the subject was the more excusable, as the composition is re- 
ferred to a night journey on a camel. 

* Angara cum schol. Sunsenii, ed. Menil., 181C, v. 15. 

t Amrulkeisi- Moallakat, ed. E. G. Hengsteuberg, 1823; Hamasa, ed. 
Freytag, Part i., 1828, lib. vii., p. 785. Compare, also, the pleasing 
work entitled Amrilkais, the Poet and King, translated by Fr. Riickert, 
1843, p. 29 and 62, where southern showers of rain are twice described 
with exceeding truth to nature. The royal poet visited the court of 
the Emperor Justinian, several years before the birth of Mohammed, 
to seek aid against his enemies. See Le Divan d^Amro 'Ikals, accom- 
pagne d'une traduction par le Baron MacQuckin de Slane, 1837, p. 111. 

t Naheghah Dhohyani, in Silvestre de Sacy's Chrestom. Arabe, 1806, 
t. iii., p. 47. On the early Arabian literature generally, see Weil's Die 
Poet. Litteratur der Araber vor Mohammed, 1837, s. 15 and 90, as well 
as Frey tag's Darstellung der Arabischen Verskunst, 1830, s. 372-392. 
We may soon expect an excellent and complete version of the Arabian 
poetry, descriptive of nature, in the writings of Hamasa, from our 
great poet, Friedrich Riickert. 

$ HamascB Carmina, ed. Freytag, Fart i., 1828, p. 788. "Here fin 
ishes." It is said in p. 796, " the chapter on travei and sleepiness." 



62 COSMOS. 

I lir.ve endeavored, in this section, to manifest, in a fiag- 
mentary manner, the different influence exercised by the ex- 
ternal world, or the aspect of animate and inanimate nature 
at difTerent periods of time, on the thoughts and mode of feel- 
ing of different races. I have extracted from the history of 
literature the characteristic expressions of the love of nature. 
My object, therefore, as throughout the whole of this work, 
has been, to give general rather than complete views, by the 
selection of examples illustrative of the peculiar characteristics 
of different epochs and different races of men. I have noticed 
the changes manifested in the literature of the Greeks and 
Romans, to the gradual decay of those feelings which gave 
an imperishable luster to classical antiquity in the "West, and 
I have traced in the writings of the early fathers of the Chris- 
tian Church the beautiful expression of a love of nature, de- 
veloped in the calm seclusion of an anchorite life. In consid- 
ering the Indo-Germanic races (using the term in its strictest 
definition), we have passed from the German poetry of the 
Middle Ages to that of the highly-civilized ancient East Ari- 
ans (Indians), and of the less favored West Arians, or inhab- 
itants of ancient Iran. After a rapid glance at the Celtic 
Gaelic songs and the recently-discovered Finnish Epos, I have 
delineated the rich life of nature that breathes forth from the 
exalted compositions of the Hebrews and Arabs — races of Se- 
mitic or Al-ams&amp;iG origin ; and thus we have traced the im- 
ages reflected by the external world on the imagination of 
nations dwelling in the north and. southeast of Europe, in 
Western Asia, in the Persian plateaux, and in the Indian 
tiopical regions. I have been induced to pursue this course 
from the idea that, in order to comprehend nature in all its* 
vast sublimity, it would be necessary to present it under a 
two-fold aspect, first objectively, as an actual phenomenon, 
and next subjectively, as it is reflected in the feelings of man- 
kind. 

When the glory of the Araraseic, Greek, and Roman do- 
minion, or, I might almost say, when the ancient world had 
passed away, v/e find in the great and inspired founder of a 
n'few era, Dante Alighieri, occasional manifestations of the 
deepest sensibility to the charms of the terrestrial life of na- 
ture, whenever he abstracts himself from the passionate and 
subjective control of that despondent mysticism which consti- 
tuted the general circle of his ideas. The period in which 
he lived followed immediately that of the decline of the Sua- 
bian Minnesingers, rf whom I have already spoken. At the 



DESCRIPTIONS OF NATURE IN EARLY ITALIAN POETS. G3 

close of the first canto of his Picrgatorio* Dante depicts with 
inimitable grace the morning fragrance, and the trembling 
light on the mirror of the gently-moved and distant sea {il 
tremolar clella marina) ; and in the fifth canto, the bursting 
of the clouds, and the swelling of the rivers, when, after the 
battle of Campaldino, the body of Buonconte da Montefeltro 
was lost in the Arno.f The entrance into the thick grove of 
the terrestrial paradise is drawn from the poet's remembrance 
of the pine forest near llavenna, " la pineta in sul lito di 
chiassi,''X where the matin song of the birds resounds through 
the leafy boughs. The local fidelity of this picture of nature 
contrasts in the celestial paradise with the " stream of light 
flashing innumerable sparks,§ which fall into the flowers on 
the shore, and then, as if inebriated with their sweet fra- 
grance, plunge back into the stream, while others rise around 
them." It would almost seem as if this fiction had its origin 
in the poet's recollection of that peculiar and rare phosphores- 
cent condition of the ocean, when luminous points appear to 
rise from the breaking waves, and, spreading themselves over 
the surface of the waters, convert the liquid plain into a mov- 
ing sea of sparkling stars. The remarkable conciseness of the 
style of the Divino, Commedia adds to the depth and earnest- 
ness of the impression which it produces. 

In lingering on Italian ground, although avoiding the frigid 
pastoral romances, I would here refer, after Dante, to the 
plaintive sonnet in which Petrarch describes the impression 

• Dante, Purgaiorio, canto i., v. 115: 

" L' alba vinceva 1' ora mattutina 
Che fuggia 'nnanzi, si che di lontano 
Conobbi il tremolar della marina" .... 

t Purg., canto v., v. 109-127 : 

"Ben sal come nell' aer si raccoglie 

Quell' umido vapor, che in acqua riede, 

Tosto che sale, dove '1 freddo il coglie" .... 
X Purg., canto xxviii., v. 1-24. 
$ Parad., canto xxx., v. 61-69: 

" E vidi lume in forma di riviera 

Fulvido di fulgori intra due rive 

Dipinte di mirabil primavera. 

Di tal Humana uscian faville viva 

E d' ogni parte si mettean ne' fiori, 

Quasi rubin, che ore circonscrive. 

Poi come inebriate dagli odori, 

Riprofondavan se nel miro gurge 

E s' una entrava, un altra n' uscia fuori," 

I do not make any extracts from the Canzones of the Vita Nuova, be- 
cause the similitudes and images which they contain do not belong tc 
the purely natural range of lerrestrial phenomena. 



64 COSMOS. 

made on his mind by the charmmg Valley of Vaucluse, after 
death had robbed him of Lam-a ; the smaller poems of Boi- 
ardo, the friend of Hercules d'Este ; and, more recently, the 
stanzas of Vittoria Colonna.* 

When classical literature acquired a more generally-dif- 
fused vigor by the intercourse suddenly opened with the po- 
litically degenerated Greeks, we meet with the earliest evi- 
dence of this better spirit in the works of Cardinal Bembo, 
the friend and counselor of Raphael, and the patron of art ; 
for in the ^tna Dialogue, written in the youth of the au- 
thor, there is a charming and vivid sketch of the geographical 
distribution of the plants growing on the declivities of the 
mountain, from the rich corn-fields of Sicily to the snow-cov- 
ered margin of the crater. The finished work of his maturer 
age, the Historic^ Venetce, characterizes still more picturesque- 
ly the climate and vegetation of the New Continent. 

Every thing concurred at this period to fill the imagina- 
tions of men with grand images of the suddenly-extended 
boundaries of the known world, and of the enlargement of hu- 
man powers, which had been of simultaneous occurrence. 
As, in^ntiquity, the Macedonian expeditions to Paropanisus 
and the wooded alluvial valleys of Western Asia awakened 
impressions derived from the aspect of a richly-adorned exotic 
nature, whose images were vividly reflected in the works of 

* I would here refer to Boiardo's sonnet, beginning, 
Ombrosa selva, che il mio duolo ascoiti, 
and the fine stanzas of Vittoria Colonna, which begin, 
Quando miro la terra ornata e bella, 
Di mille vaghi ed odorati fiori .... 

A fine and very characteristic description of the country seat of Fra 
castoro, on the hill of Incassi (Mons Caphius), near Verona, is given by 
this writer (who was equally distinguished in medicine, mathematics, 
and poetry), in his Naugerius de Poetica Dialogua. Hieron. Fracas to- 
rii. Op. 1591, Part i., p. 321-326. See, also, in a didactic poem by the 
same writer, lib. ii., v. 208-219 (Op., p. 636), the pleasing passage on 
the culture of the Citrus in Italy. I miss with astonishment any ex- 
pression of feeling connected with the aspect of nature in the letters 
of Petrarch, either when, in 1345 (three years, therefore, before the 
death of Laura), he attempted the ascent of Mont Ventour from Vau- 
cluse, in the eager hope of beholding from thence a part of his native 
land ; when he ascended the banks of the Rhine to Cologne ; or wheu 
he visited the Gulf of Baiae. He lived more in the world of his classic- 
al remembrances of Cicero and the Roman poets, or in the emotions ol 
his ascetic melancholy, than in the actual scenes by which be was sur- 
rounded. (See Petrarckce Epist. de Rebus Familianbns, lib. iv., 1, v. 
3 and 4; p. 119, 156, and 161, ed. Lugdun., 1601). There is, howev- 
er, an exceedingly picturesque description of a gi-eat tempest which he 
observed near r^aples in 1343 (lib. v., 5, p. 165). 



DESCRIPTIONS OF NATURE BY COLUMBUS. 65 

highly-gifted writers, even for centuries afterward, so, in like 
manner, did the discovery of America act in exercising a sec- 
ond and stronger influence on the western nations than that 
of the crusades. The tropical world, with all the luxuriance 
of its vegetation on the plains, with all the gradations of its 
varied organisms on the declivities of the Cordilleras, and 
with all the reminiscences of northern climates associated with 
the inhabited plateaux of Mexico, New Granada, and QuitOj 
was now first revealed to the eyes of Europeans. Fa.ncy, 
without whose aid no truly great work can succeed in the 
hands of man, lent a peculiar charm to the delineations of na- 
ture sketched by Columbus and Vespucci. The first of these 
discoverers is distinguished for his deep and earnest sentiment 
of religion, as we find exemplified in his description of the 
mild sky of Paria, and of the mass of water of the Orinoco, 
which he believed to flow from the eastern paradise, while 
the second is remarkable for the intimate acquaintance he 
evinces with the poets of ancient and modern times, as shown 
in his description of the Brazilian coast. The religious senti- 
ment thus early evinced by Columbus became converted, with 
increasing years, and under the influence of the persecutions 
*v rxjch he had to encounter, into a feeling of melancholy and 
r.ofbid enthusiasm. 

in the heroic ages of the Portuguese and Castilian races, 
it was not thirst for gold alone, as has been asserted from ig- 
norance of the national character at that period, but rather a 
general spirit of daring, that led to the prosecution oi distant 
voyages. The names of Hayti, Cubaj^ua, and Darien acted 
on the imaginations of men in the beginning of the s:ixteenth 
century in the same manner as those of Tinian and Otaheite 
have done in more recent times, since Ansou and Cook. If 
the narrations of far-distant lands then drew the youtn of the 
Spanish peninsula, Flanders, Lombardy, and Southern Ger- 
many, to rally around the victorious standard of an imperial 
leader on the ridges of the Andes, or the burning plains of 
Uraba and Coro, the milder influence of a more modern civ- 
ilization, when all portions of the earth's surface were more 
generally accessible, gave other motives and directions to tha 
restless longing for distant travels. A passionate love of the 
study of nature, which originated chiefly in the north, glowed 
in the breast of all ; intellectual expansion of views beca.me 
associated with enlargement of knowledge ; while tiie pontic 
and sentimental tone of feeling, peculiar to the epoch of wh'ch 
we speak, has, since the close of the last century, been ident** 



56 COSMOS. 

fied witn literary compositions, whose forms were unknown 
to former ao^es. 

On casting a retrospective glance on the great discoveries 
which prepared the way for this modern tone of feeling, our 
attention is especially attracted by the descriptions of nature 
whioh we owe to the pen of Columbus. It is only recently 
that we have been in possession of his own ship's journal, his 
letters to the Chancellor Sanchez, to the Donna Juana de la 
Torre, governess of the Infant Don Juan, and to Queen Isa- 
bella. I have already attempted, in my critical investigation 
of the history of the geography of the fifteenth and sixteenth 
centuries,* to show with what depth of feeling for nature the 
great discoverer was endowed, and how he described the earth 
and the new heaven opened t^ his eyes (viage ?iuevo al nuevo 
cielo i mundo que fasta entonces estaba en occidto) with a 
beauty and simplicity of expression which can only be ade- 
quately appreciated by those who are conversant with the an- 
cient vigor of the language at the period in which he wrote. 

The physiognomy and forms of the vegetation, the impene 
"trable thickets of the forests, " in which one can scarcely dis- 
tinguish the stems to which the several blossoms and leaves 
belong," the wild luxuriance of the flowering soil along the 
humid shores, and the rose-colored flamingoes, which, fishing 
at early morn at the mouth of the rivers, impart animation to 
the scenery, all, in turn, arrested the attention of the old mar- 
iner as he sailed along the shores of Cuba, between the small 
Lucayan islands and the Jardinillos, which I too have visited. 
Each newly-discovered land seems to him more beautiful than 
the one last described, and he deplores his inability to find 
words in which to express the sweet impressions awakened ii?. 
his mind. Wholly unacquainted with botany (although, 
through the influence of Arabian and Jewish physicians, some 
Buperficial knowledge of plants had been diffused in Spain), 
he was led, by a simple love of nature, to individualize all the 
unknown forms he beheld. Thus, in Cuba alone, he distin- 
guishes seven or eight different species of palms, more beau- 
tiful and taller than the date-tree (variedades de palmas su- 
periores a las nuestras en su helleza y altara). He informs 
his learned friend Anghiera that he has seen pines and palms 
{palmeta et pineta) wonderfully associated together in one 
and the same plain ; and he even so acutely observed the 
vegetation around him, that he was the first to notice that 

* Humboldt, Examen Critique de VHistoire de la Oiographie du 
uouveau Continent, t, iii:, p 227-248. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF NATURE BY COLUMBUS. 67 

there were pines on the mountains of Cibao whose fruits are 
not fir-cones, but berries like the olives of the Axarafe de Se- 
villa; and further, as I have already remarked, Columbus* 
already separated the genus Podocarpus from the family of 
Abietineae. 

" The beauty of the new land," says the discoverer, " far 
surpasses the Campina de Cordova. The trees are bright, 
with an ever- verdant foliage, and are always laden with fruit. 
The plants on the ground are high and flowering. The air 
is warm as that of April in Castile, and the nightingale sings 
more melodiously than Words can describe. At night the 
song of other smaller birds resounds sweetly, and I have also 
heard our grasshoppers and frogs. Once I came to a deeply- 
inclosed harbor, and saw a high mountain that had never 
been seen by any mortal eye, and from whence gentle waters 
(lindas aguas) flowed down. The mountain was covered 
with firs and variously-formed trees adorned with beautiful 
blossoms. On sailing up the stream, which empties itself 
into the bay, I was astonished at the cool shade, the clear, 
crystal-like water, and the number of the singing birds. I 
felt as if I could never leave so charming a spot, as if a thou- 
sand tongues would fail to describe all these things, and as if 
my hand were spell-bound and refused to write {para hacer 
rdacion a los Reyes de las cosas que vian no basiaran mil 
lenguas a referillo, ni la mano para lo escribir, que le pare- 
ria questaba encantado)y\ 

We here learn, from the journal of a wholly unlettered sea- 
man, the power which the beauty of nature, in its individual 
forms, may exercise on a susceptible mind. Feelings ennoble 
language ; for the style of the Admiral, especially when, at 
the age of sixty-seven, on his fourth voyage, he relates his 
wonderful dreamf on the shore of Veragua, if not more elo- 
quent, is at any rate more interesting than the allegorical, 
pastoral romances of Boccacio, and the two poems of Arcadia 
by Sannazaro and Sydney, than Garcilasso's Salicio y Ne- 
moroso, or than the Diana of Jorge de Monteraayor. The 

* See vol. i., p. 282. 

t Journal of Columbus on his first voyage (Oct. 29, 1492; Nov. 
2.5-29; Dec. 7-16; Dec. 21). See, also, his letter to Dona Maria de 
Guzman, ama del Principe D. Juan, Dec., 1500, in Navarrete, ColeC' 
don de los Viages que hiciiron por mar los Espanoles, t. i., p. 43, 65, 72, 
82, 92, 100, and2G6. 

i Navarrete, op. cit., p. 303-304, Carta del Almirante a los Reyet 63' 
crita en Jamaica a 7 de Julio, 1503 ; Humboldt, Examen Crit., t. iiv 
p. 231-236. 



68 COSMOS. 

elegiac idyllic element unfortunately predominated too long in 
the literature of the Spaniards and Italians. It required all 
the freshness of delineation which characterized the adven- 
tures of Cervantes's Knight of La Mancha to atone for the 
Galatea of the same author. Pastoral romance, however it 
may be ennobled by the beauty of language and tenderness of 
sentiment manifested in the works of the above-named great 
writers, must, from its very nature, remain cold and weari- 
some, like the allegorical and artificial productions of the Mid- 
dle Ages. Individuality of observation can alone lead to a 
truthful representation of nature ; thus it is supposed that the 
finest descriptive stanzas in the Gerusalemina Liberata^ may 
be traced to impressions derived from the poet's recollection 
of the beautiful scenery of Sorrento by which he was sur- 
rounded. 

The power of stamping descriptions of nature with the im- 
press of faithful individuality, which springs from actual ok 
servation, is most richly displayed in the great national epic 
of Portuguese literature. It seems as if a perfumed Eastern 
air breathed throughout this poem, which was written under 
a tropical sky in the rocky grotto near Macao, and in the Mo- 
luccas. Although I would not venture to assume that my 
opinion could serve as a confirmation of the bold expression 
of Friedrich Schlegel, that " the Lusiad of Camoens far sur- 
passes Ariosto in richness of color and luxuriance of fancy,"t 
I may be permitted to add, as an observer of nature, that in 
the descriptive portions of the work, the enthusiasm of the 
poet, the ornaments of diction, and the sweet tones of melan- 
choly never impede the accurate representation of physical 
phenomena, but rather, as is always the case where art draws 
from a pure source, heighten the animated impression of the 
greatness and truth of the delineations. Camoens abounds in 
inimitable descriptions of the never-ceasing connection between 
the air and sea — between the varying form of the cloudy can- 
opy, its meteorological processes, and the difierent conditions 

* Tasso, canto xvi., stanze 9-16. 

+ See Friedrich Schlegel's Sdmmtl. WerJte, bd. ii., s. 96 ; and on the 
disturbing mythological dualism, and the mixture of antique fable with 
Christian contemplations, see bd. x., s. .54. Camoens has tried, iu 
stanzas 82-84, which have not met with sufficient admiration, to justi- 
fy this mythological dualism. Tethys avows, in a naive manner, but in 
verses inspired by the nob/ est conception of poetry, ''that she herself, 
Saturn, Jupiter, and all the host of gods, are vain fables, created by the 
blind delusion of mortals, and serving only to lend a charm to song-— 
A Sancta Providencia que em Jupiter aqui se repvesenta.^' 



DESCRIl'TIONS OF NATURE IN CAMOENS 3 LUSIAD. (iU 

of the surface of the ocean. He describes this surface when, 
curled by gentle breezes, the short waves flash beneath the 
play of the reflected beams of light, and again vi^hen the ships 
of Coelho and Paul de Gama contend ia a fearful storm against 
the wildly-agitated elements.* Camoens is, in the strictest 
sense of the word, a great sea painter. He had served as a 
soldier, and fought in the Empire of Morocco, at the foot of 
Atlas, in the Red Sea, and on the Persian Gulf; twice he 
had doubled the Cape, and, inspired by a deep love of nature, 
he passed sixteen years in observing the phenomena of tho 
ocean on the Indian and Chinese shores. He describes the 
electric fires of St. Elmo (the Castor and Pollux of the ancient 
Greek mariners), "the living light,t sacred to the seaman." 
He depicts the threatening water-spout in its gradual devel- 
opment, " how the cloud woven from fine vapor revolves in a 
circle, and, letting down a slender tube, thirstily, as it were, 
sucks up the water, and how, when the black cloud is filled, 
the foot of the cone recedes, and, flying upward to the sky, 
gives back in its flight, as fresh water, that which it had 
drawn from the waves with a surging noise. "J "Let the 
book-learned," says the poet, and his taunting words might 
almost be applied to the present age, " try to explain the hid- 
den wonders of this world, since, trusting to reason and science 
alone, they are so ready to pronounce as false what is heard 
from the lips of the sailor, whose only guide is experience." 

The talent of the enthusiastic poet for describing nature is 
not limited to separate phenomena, but is very conspicuous in 
the passages in which he comprehends large masses at one 
glance. The third book sketches, in a few strokes, the form 

* Os Lusiadas de Camoes, canto i., est. 19 ; canto vi., est. 71-82. See, 
also, the comparison in the description of a tempest raging in a forest, 
canto i., est. 35. 

t The fire of St. Elmo, " o lume vivo que a maritima gente tern por 
santo, em tempo de tormenta" (canto v., est. 18). One flame, the Hel- 
ena of the Greek mariners, brings misfortune (Plin., ii., 37") ; two flames 
Castor and Pollux, appearing with a rustling noise, "like fluttering 
birds," are good omens (Stob., Eclog. Phys., i., p. 514; Seneca, Nat. 
Qucest., i., 1). On the eminently graphical character of Camoens's de- 
scriptions of nature, see the great Paris edition of 1818, in the Vida de 
Camoes, hj Dom Joze Maria de Souza, p. cii. 

X The water spout in canto v., est. 19-22, may be compared with the 
equally poetic and faithful description of Lucretius, vi., 423-442. On 
the fi-esh water, which, toward the close of the phenomenon, appears 
to fall from the upper part of the column of water, see Ogden On Wa- 
ter Spoutu (from observations made in 1820, during a voyage from Ha- 
vana to Norfolk), in Silliman's American Journal of Science, vol. xxix., 
1836, p. 254-260.. 



70 COSMOS. 

of Europe,* from the coldest north to " the Liisitanian realm 
and the strait where Hercules achieved his last labor." Al 
lusion is constantly made to the manners and civilization ol 
the nations who inhabit this diversified portion of the earth 
From the Prussians, Muscovites, and the races '' que o Rke 
no frio lava,^^ he hastens to the glorious plains of Hellas 
" que creastes os peitos eloquentes, e osjuizos de alta phanta 
sia.^' In the tenth book he takes a more extended view. 
Tethys leads Gama to a high mountain, to reveal to him thei 
secrets of the mechanism of the earth (machina do tnundo), 
and to disclose the course of the planets (according to the 
Ptolemaic hypothesis),! It is a vision in the style of Dante, 
and as the earth forms the center of the moving universe, all 
the knowledge then acquired concerning the countries already 
discovered, and their produce, is included in the description 
of the globe.| Europe is no longer, as in the third book, the 
sole object of attention, but all portions of the earth are in 
turns passed in review; even "the land of the Holy Cross" 
(Brazil) is named, and the coasts discovered by Magellan, " by 
birth but not by loyalty a son of Lusitania." 

If I have specially extolled Camoens as a sea painter, it 
was in order to indicate that the aspect of a terrestrial life 
appears to have attracted his attention less powerfully. Sis- 
raondi has justly remarked that the whole poem bears no 
trace of graphical description of tropical vegetation, and its 
peculiar physiognomy. Spices and other aromatic substances, 

* Canto iii., est. 7-21. In my references I have always followed the 
lext of Camoens according to the editio princeps of 1572, which haa 
been given afresh in the excellent and splendid editions of Dom Joze 
Maria de Souza-Botelho (Paris, 1818). In the German quotations I 
have generally used the translation of Donner (1833]). The principal 
aim of the Lusiad of Camoens is to do honor to his nation. It would be 
a monument well worthy of his fame, and of the nation whom he extols, 
if a hall were constructed in Lisbon, after the noble examples of the 
halls of Schiller and Gbthe in the Grand Ducal Palace of Weimar, and 
if the twelve grand compositions of my talented and deceased friend 
Gerard, which adorn the Souza edition, were executed in large dimen- 
sions, in fresco, on well-lighted walls. The dream of the King Dom 
Manoel, in which the rivers Indus and Ganges appear to him ; the 
Giant Adamastor hovering over the Cape of Good Hope ("£m sou 
aquelle occulta e grande C^o, a quern chamais v6» outros Tormentorio''^) ; 
the murder of Ignes de Castro, and the lovely Ilha de Venus, would 
all produce the most admirable effect. 

t Canto X., est. 79-90. Camoens, like Vespucci, speaks of the part 
of the heavens nearest to the southern pole as poor in stars (canto v., 
est. 14). He is also acquainted with the ice of the southern seas (canto 
v., est. 27) t Canto x., est. 91-141. 



DESCRIPTIONS OF NATURE IN ERCILLa's ARAUCANA. 71 

together with useful products of commerce, are alone noticed. 
The episode of the magic island^ certainly presents the most 
charming pictures of natural scenery, but the vegetation, as 
befits an Ilha de Venus, is composed of ** myrtles, citrons, 
fragrant lemon-trees, and pomegranates," all belonging to the 
climate of Southern Europe. We find a greater sense of en- 
joyment from the littoral woods, and more attention devoted 
to the forms of the vegetable kingdom, in the writings of the 
greatest navigator of his day, Columbus ; but then, it must 
be admitted, while the latter notes down in his journal the 
vivid impressions of each day as they arose, the poem of Ca- 
moens was written to do honor to the great achievements of 
the Portuguese. The poet, accustomed to harmonious sounds, 
could not either have felt much disposed to borrow from the lan- 
guage of the natives strange names of plants, or to have inter- 
woven them in the description of landscapes, which were design- 
ed as back-grounds for the main subjects of which he treated. 
By the side of the image of the knightly Camoens has often 
been placed the equally romantic one of a Spanish warrior, 
who served under the banners of the great Emperor in Peru 
and Chili, and sang in those distant climes the deeds in which 
he had himself taken so honorable a share. But in the whole 
epic poem of the Araucana, by Don Alonso de Ercilla, the 
aspect of volcanoes covered with eternal snow, of torrid sylvan 
valleys, and of arms of the sea extending far into the land, 
has not been productive of any descriptions which may be re- 
garded as graphical. The exaggerated praise which Cer- 
vantes takes occasion to expend on Ercilla in the ingenious 
satirical review of Don Quixote's books, is probably merely 
the result of the rivalry subsisting between the Spanish and 
Italian schools of poetry, but it would almost appear to have 
deceived^ Voltaire and many modern critics. The Araucana 
is certainly penetrated by a noble feeling of nationality. The 
description of the manners of a wild race, who perish in 
struggling for the liberty of their country, is not devoid of an- 
imation, but Ercilla's style is not smooth or easy, while it is 
overloaded with proper ns-mes, and is devoid of all trace of 
poetic enthusiasm. t 

* Canto ix., est. 51-63. (Consult Ludwig Kriegk, Schriften zur all' 
gemeinen Erdkunde, 1840, s. 338.) The whole Ilha de Venus is an al- 
legorical fable, as is clearly shown in est. 89 ; but the beginning of the 
relation of Dom Manoel's dream describes an Indian mountain and for- 
est district (canto iv., est. 70). 

1 A predilection for the old literature of Spain, and for the enchant* 
ing region in which the Araucana of Alonso de Ercilla y Zuniga was 



72 COSMOS. 

This enthusiastic poetic inspiration is to be traced, howev- 
er, in many stroph'?s of the Komancero Caballeresco ,* in the 
religious melancholy pervading the writings of Fray Luis de 
Leon, as, for instance, in his description of the charming night, 
when he celebrates the eternal lights {resplandores eterTiales) 
of the starry heavens ;t and in the compositions of Calderon. 

composed, has led me to read through the whole of this poem (which, 
unfortunately, comprises 42,000 verses) on two occasions, once in Peni, 
and again recently in Paris, when, by the kindness of a learned travel- 
er, M. Ternaux Compans, I received, for the purpose of comparing it 
with Ercilla, a very scarce book, printed in 1596 at Lima, and contain- 
ing the nineteen cantos of the Arauco domado {compuesto for el Licen- 
dado Pedro de Ofia natural de los Infantes de Engol en Chile). Of the 
epic poem of Ercilla, which Voltaire regarded as an Iliad, and Sis- 
mondi as a newspaper in rhyme, the first fifteen cantos were composed 
between 1555 and 1563, and were published in 1569 ; the later cantos 
were first printed in 1590, only six years before the wretched poem of 
Pedro de Ona, which bears the same title as one of the master-works 
of Lope de Vega, in which the Cacique Caupolican is also the principal 
personage. Ercilla is unaffected and true-hearted, especially in those 
parts of his composition which he wrote in the field, mostly on the bark 
of trees and the skins of animals, for want of paper. The description 
of his poverty, and of the ingratitude which he, like others, experienced 
at the court of King Philip, is extremely touching, particularly at the 
close of the 37th canto : 

" Climas pasd, mude constelaciones, 
Golfos innavegables navegando, 
Estendiendo Sefior, vuestra corona 
Hasta casi la austral frigida zona." 

" The flower of my life is past; led by a late-earned experience, I will 
renounce earthly things, weep, and no longer sing." The natural de- 
scriptions of the garden of the sorcerer, of the tempest raised by Epo- 
namon, and the dehneation of the ocean (Parti., p. 80, 135, and 173; 
Part ii., p. 130 and 161, in the edition of 1733), are wholly devoid of 
life and animation. Geographical registers of words are accumulated 
in such a manner that, in canto xxvii., twenty-seven proper names fol- 
low each other in a single stanza of eight lines. Part ii. of the Arau- 
tana is not by Ercilla, but is a continuation, in twenty cantos, by Diego 
de Santistevan Osorio, appended to the thirty-seven cantos of Ercilla. 

* See, in Romancero de Romances Caballerescos e Historicos ordena- 
do, por D. Augustin Duran, Part i., p. 189, and Part ii., p. 237, the fine 
strophes commencing Yba declinando el dia — Su curso y ligeras horas, 
and those on the flight of King Rodrigo, beginning 

"Cnando las pintadas aves 
Mudas estdn, y la tierra 
A te?Ua escucka los rios" 

t Fray Luis de Leon, Obras Proptias y Traducciones, dedicadag a 
Don Pedro Portocarero, 1681, p. 120: Noche serena. A deep feeling 
for nature also manifests itself occasionally in the ancient mystic poetry 
of the Spaniards (as, fo: instance, in Fray Luis de Granada, Santa Te- 
resa de Jesus, and Malon de Chaide) ; but the natural pictures are gen- 
erally only the external investment under which the ideal religioua 
conceptiou is symbolized. 



UALDERON. 73 

'* At the period when Spanish comedy had attained its fullest 
development," says my friend Ludwig Tieck, one of the pro- 
ibundest critics of dramatic literature, " we often find, in the 
romanesque and lyrical meter of Calderon and his cotempo- 
raries, dazzlingly beautiful descriptions of the sea, of mount- 
ains, gardens, and sylvan valleys, but these are always so inter- 
woven with allegorical allusions, and adorned with so much 
artificial brilliancy, that we feel we are reading harmoniously 
rhythmical descriptions, recurring continually with only slight 
variations, rather than as if we could breathe the free air of 
nature, or feel the reality of the mountain breath and the val- 
ley's shade." In the play of Life is a Dream {la vida es 
sueno), Calderon makes the Prince Sigismund lament the 
misery of his captivity in a number of gracefully-drawn con- 
trasts with the freedom of all organic nature. He depicts 
birds " which flit with rapid wings across the wide expanse 
of heaven ;" fishes, " which but just emerged from the mud 
and sand, seek the wide ocean, Avhose boundlessness seems 
scarcely sufiicient for their bold course. Even the stream 
which winds its tortuous way among flowers finds a free pas- 
sage across the meadow ; and I," cries Sigismund, in despair, 
" I, who have more life than these, and a freer spirit, must 
content myself with less freedom !" In the same manner 
Don Fernando speaks to the King of Fez, in The Steadfast 
Prince, although the style is often disfigured by antitheses, 
witty comparisons, and artificially-turned phrases from the 
school of Gongora.* I have referred to these individual ex- 
amples because they show, in dramatic poetry, which treats 
chiefly of events, passions, and characters, that descriptions 
become merely the reflections, as it were, of the disposition 
and tone of feeling of the principal personages. Shakspeare, 
who, in the hurry of his animated action, has hardly ever 
time or opportunity for entering deliberately into the descrip- 
tions of natural scenery, yet paints them by accidental refer- 
ence, and in allusion to the feelings of the principal charac- 
ters, in such a manner that we seem to see them and live in 
them. Thus, in the Midsummer Night's Dream, we live in 
the wood ; and in the closing scenes of the MercJiant of Ven- 
ice, we see the moonshine which brightens the warm sum- , 
mer's night, without there being actually any direct descrip- 
tion of either. *' A true description of nature occurs, howev- 

* Calderon, in The Steadfast Prince, on the approach of the fleet, 
A.ct i., scene 1; and on the sovereignty of the wild beasts iu the forests, 
A.ct ill., scene 2. 

Vol. \\—T 



74 COSMOS. 

er, ill ^tnp; Lear, where the seemingly mad Edgar represents 
to hw hJmd father, Gloucester, while on the plain, that they 
are ascexidijig Dover ClifF. The description of the view, on 
looking into the depths below, actually excites a fueling of 
giddiness."* 

If, in Shakspeare, the inward animation of the feelings and 
the grand simolicity of the language gave such a wonderful 
degree of life-like truth and individuality to the expression of 
nature, in Milton's exalted poem of Paradise Lost the de- 
scriptions are, from the very nature of the subject, more mag- 
nificent than graphic. The whole richness of the poet's fancy 
and diction is lavished on the descriptions of the luxuriant 
beauty of Paradise, but, as in Thomson's charming didactic 
poem of The Seasons, vegetation could only be sketched in 
general and more indefinite outlines. According to the judg- 
ment of critics deeply versed in Indian poetry, Kahdasa's 
poem on a similar subject, the llitusanhara, which was writ- 
ten more than fifteen hundred vears earlier, individualizes, 
with greater vividness, the powerlul vegetation of tropical re- 
gions, but it wants the charm which, in Thomson's work, 
springs from the more varied division of the year in northern 
latitudes, as the transition of the autumn rich in fruits to the 
winter, and of the winter to the reanimating season of Spring: , 
and from the images which may thus be drawn of the labors 
or pleasurable pursuits of men in each part of tne year. 

If we proceed to a period nearer our ovi^n time, we observe 
that, since the latter half of the eighteenth century, aelmea- 
tive prose especially has developed itself with peculiar vigor- 
Although the general mass of knowledge has been so excess- 
ively enlarged from the universally-extended study of nature- 
it does not appear that, in those susceptible of a higher da 
gree of poetic inspiration, intellectual contemplation has suo&gt; 
under the weight of accumulated knowledge, but rather thai 
as a result of poetic spontaneity, it has gained in comprehen- 
siveness and elevation ; and, learning how to penetrate deep- 
er into the structure of the earth's crust, has explored in X\i^ 
mountain masses of our planet the stratified sepulchers of ex 
tinct organisms, and traced the geographical distribution ol 
animals and plants, and the mutual connection of races 
Thus, among those who were the first, by an exciting appeal 
to the imaginative faculties, powerfully to animate the senti- 

* I have taken the passages distinguished in the text by mark« of 
quotation, and relating to Calderon and Shakspeare, fi-om ur.publisUeA 
letters addressed to myself by Ludwig Tieck. 



MODERN PROSE WRITERS 75 

merit of enjoyment derived from communion with nature, and 
consequently, also, to give impetus to its inseparable accom- 
paniment, the love of distant travels, we may mention in 
France Jean Jacques Rousseau, Buffon, and Bernardin de 
St. Pierre, and, exceptionally to include a still living author, 
I would name my old friend Auguste de Chateaubriand ;* in 
Great Britain, the intellectual Playfair ; and in Germany, 
Cook's companion on his second voyage of circumnavigation, 
the eloquent George Forster, who was endowed with so pe 
culiarly happy a faculty of generalization in the study of nature. 
It would be foreign to the present work were I to under- 
take to inquire into the characteristics of these writers, and 
investigate the causes which at one time lend a charm and 
grace to the descriptions of natural scenery contained in their 
universally-diffused works, and at another disturb the impres- 
sions which they were designed to call forth ; but as a trav- 
eler, who has derived the greater portion of his knowledge 
from immediate observation, I may perhaps be permitted to 
introduce a few scattered remarks on a recent, and, on tho 
whole, but little cultivated branch of literature. Buiibn — 
great and earnest as he was — simultaneously embracing a 
knowledge of the planetary structures, of organization, and of 
the laws of light and magnetic forces, and far more profoundly 
versed in physical investigations than his cotemporaries sup- 
posed, shows more artificial elaboration of style and more rhe- 
torical pomp than individualizing truthfulness when he passes 
from the description of the habits of animals to the delinea- 
tion of natural scenery, inclining the mind to the reception of 
exalted impressions rather than seizing upon the imagination 
by presenting a visible picture of actual nature, or conveying 
to the senses the echo, as it were, of reality. Even through- 
out the most justly celebrated of his works in this department 
of literature, we instinctively feel that he could never have 
left Central Europe, and that he is deficient in personal ob- 
servation of the tropical world, which he believes he is cor- 
rectly describing. But that which we most especially miss 
in the writings of the great naturalist is a harmonious mode 
of connecting the representation of nature with the expression 
of awakened feelings ; he is, in fact, deficient in almost all 
that flows from the mysterious analogy existing between the 
mental emotions of the mind and the phenomena of the per- 
ceptive world. 

* [This distinguished writer died July 4th of the prase ;it year 
(1848).l— 2V. 



76 COSMOS. 

A greater depth of feeling and a fresher spirit of animation 
pervade the works of Jean Jacques Rousseau, Bernardin de 
St. Pierre, and Chateaubriand. If I here allude to the per- 
suasive eloquence of the first of these writers, as manifested 
in the picturesque scenes of Clarens and La Meillerie on Lake 
Leman, it is because, in the principal works of this zealous 
but ill-instructed plant-collector — which were written twenty 
years before Bufibn's fanciful Epoques de la Nature* — poetic 
inspiration shows itself principally in the innermost peculiari- 
ties of the language, breaking forth as fluently in his prose as 
in the immortal poems of Klopstock, Schiller, Goethe, and 
Byron. Even where there is no purpose of bringing forward 
subjects immediately connected with the natural sciences, our 
pleasure in these studies, when referring to the limited por- 
tions of the earth best known to us, may be increased by the 
charm of a poetic mode of representation. 

In recurring to prose writers, we dwell with pleasure on 
the small work entitled Paul et Virginie, to which Bernardin 
de St. Pierre owes the fairer portion of his literary reputation. 
The work to which I allude, which can scarcely be rivaled 
by any production comprised in the literature of other coun- 
tries, is the simple picture of an island in the midst of a trop- 
ical sea, in which, sometimes favored by the serenity of the 
sky, and sometimes threatened by the violent conflict of the 
elements, two charming creatures stand picturesquely forth 
from the wild sylvan luxuriance surrounding them as with a 
variegated flowery tapestry. Here, and in the Chaumiere In- 
dienne, and even in his Etudes de la Nature, which are un- 

* The succession in which the works referred to were published is 
Qs follows: Jean Jacques Rousseau, 1759, Nouvelle Heloise; Buffon, 
Epoques de la Nature, 1778, but his Hisioire NatJtrelle, 1749-1767; Ber- 
nardin *de St. Pierre, Etudes de la Nature, 1784, Paul et Virginie, 1788, 
Chaumiere Indienne, 1791; George Forster, Reise nach der Sudsee 
1777, Kleine Schriflen, 1794. More than half a century before the 
publication of the Nouvelle Heloise, Madame de Sevigne, in her charm- 
ing letters, had already shown a vivid sense of the beauty of nature, 
such as was rarely expressed in the age of Louis XIV. See the fine 
natural descriptions in the letters of April 20, May 31, August 15, Sep- 
tember 16, and November 6, 1671, and October 23 and December^28, 
1689 (Aubenas, Hist, de Madame de S6vigni, 1842, p. 201 and 427). 
My reason for referring in the text to the old German poet, Paul Flem- 
raing, who, from 1633 to 1639, accompanied Adam Olearius on his 
journey to Muscovy and to Persia, is that, according to the convincing 
authority of my frieud, Varnhagen von Ense {Biographische Dcnkw., 
bd. iv., s. 4, 75, and i2^), " the character of Flemming's compositions 
is marked with a fre'-h and healthful vigor, while his images of nature 
are tender nnd full of aie^ 



MODERN PROSE WRITERS. 7 1 

fortunately disfigured by wild theories and erroneous physical 
opinions, the aspect of the sea, the grouping of the clcnds, the 
rustling of the air amid the crowded bamboos, the waving of 
the leafy crown of the slender palms, are all sketched with 
inimitable truth. Bernardin ie St. Pierre's master-work, 
Paul et Virginie, accompanied me to the climes whence it took 
its origin. For many years it was the constant companion of 
myself and my valued friend and fellow-traveler Bonpland, 
and often (the reader must forgive this appeal to personal feel- 
ings), in the calm brilliancy of a southern sky, or when, in the 
rainy season, the thunder re-echoed, and the lightning gleamed 
through the forests that skirt the shores of the Orinoco, we 
felt ourselves penetrated by the marvelous truth with which 
tropical nature is described, with all its peculiarity of charac- 
ter, in this little work, A like power of grasping individuali- 
ties, without destroying the general impression of the whole, 
and without depriving the subject of a free innate animation 
of poetical fancy, characterizes, even in a higher degree, the 
intellectual and sensitive mind of the author of Atala, Rene, 
Les Martyres, and Les Voyages a V Orient. In the works of 
his creative fancy, all contrasts of scenery in the remotest 
portions of the earth are brought before the reader with the 
most remarkable distinctness. The earnest grandeur of his- 
torical associations could alone impart a character of such 
depth and repose to the impressions produced by a rapid jour- 
ney. 

In the literature of Germany, as in that of Italy and Spain, 
the love of nature manifested itself too long under the artifi- 
cial form of idyl-pastoral romances and didactic poems. Such 
was the course too frequently pursued by the Persian traveler 
Paul Flemming, by Brookes, the sensitive Ewald von Kleist, 
Hagedorn, Salomon Gessner, and by Haller, one of the great- 
est naturalists of any age, whose local descriptions possess, it 
must, however, be owned, a more clearly-defined outline and 
more objective truth of coloring. The elegiac-idyUic element 
was conspicuous at that period in the morbid tone pervading 
landscape poetry, and even in Voss, that noble and profound 
student of classical antiquity, the poverty of the subject could 
not be concealed by a higher and more elegant finish of style. 
It was only when the study of the earth's surface acquired pro* 
foundness and diversity of character, and the natural sciences 
were no longer limited to a tabular enumeration of marvelous 
productions, but were elevated to a higher and more compre- 
hensive view of comparative geography, that this finished de- 



78 COSMOS. 

velopment of language could be employed for the purpose of 
giving animated pictures of distant regions. 

The earlier travelers of the Middle Ages, as, for instance 
John Mandeville (1353), Hans Schiltberger of Munich (1425), 
and Bernhard von Breytenback (1486), delight us even in the 
present day by their charming simplicity, their freedom of 
style, and the self-confidence with which they step before a 
public, who, from their utter ignorance, listen with the greater 
curiosity and readiness of behef, because they have not as yet 
learned to feel ashamed of appearing ignorant, ajnused, or as- 
tonished. The interest attached to the narratives of travels 
was then almost wholly dramatic, and the necessary and easily 
introduced admixture of the marvelous gave them almost an 
epic coloring. The manners of foreign nations are not so 
much described as they are rendered incidentally discernible 
by the contact of the travelers with the natives. The vege- 
tation is unnamed and unheeded, with the exception of an 
occasional allusion to some pleasantly-flavored or strangely- 
formed fruit, or to the extraordinary dimensions of particular 
kinds of stems or leaves of plants. Among animals, they de- 
scribe, with the greatest predilection, first, those which exhibit 
most resemblance to the human form, and, next, those which 
are the wildest and most formidable. The cotemporaries of 
these travelers believed in all the dangers which few of them 
had shared, and the slowness of navigation and the want of 
means of communication caused the -Indies, as all the tropical 
regions were then called, to appear at an immeasurable dis- 
tance. Columbus* was not yet justified in writing to Queen 
Isabella, " the world is small, much smaller than people sup- 
pose." 

The almost forgotten travels of the Middle Ages to which 
we have alluded, possessed, however, with all the poverty of 
their materials, many advantages in point of composition over 
the majority of our modern voyages. They had that character 
of unity which every work of art requires ; every thing was 
associated with one action, and made subservient to the nar- 
ration of the journey itself The interest was derived from 
the simple, vivid, and generally implicitly-believed relation of 
dangers overcome. Christian travelers, in their ignorance ot 
what had already been done by Arabs, Spanish Jews, and 
Buddhist missionaries, boasted of being the first to see and 

* Letter of the Admiral from Jamaica, July 7, 1503 : " El mundo ei 
poco; digo que el mundo no es tan grande como dice el vulgo^' (Navar 
rete, Coleccion de Viag'is Esp., t. i., p. 300). 



TRAVELERS OP THE 14tH AND 15tH CENVURIES. 7il 

describe every thing. In the midst of the obscurity in which 
the East and the interior of Asia were shrouded, distance 
seemed only to magnify the grand proportions of individual 
forms. This unity of composition is almost wholly wanting 
in most of our recent voyages, especially where their object is 
the acquirement of scientific knowledge. The narrative in 
the latter case is secondar/ to observations, and is almost 
wholly lost sight of It is only the relation of toilsome and 
frequently uninstructive mountain ascents, and, above all, of 
bold maritime expeditions, of actual voyages of discovery in 
unexplored regions, or of a sojourn in the dreadful waste of the 
icy polar zone, that can afford any dramatic interest, or admit 
of any great degree of individuality of delineation ; for here 
the desolation of the scene, and the helplessness and isolation 
of the seamen, individualize the picture and excite the imag- 
ination so much the more powerlully. 

If, from what has already been said, it be undeniably true 
that in modern books of travel the action is thrown in the 
back-ground, being in most cases only a means of linking to- 
gether successive observations of nature and of manners, yet 
this partial disadvantage is fully compensated for by the in- 
creased value of the facts observed, the greater expansion of 
natural views, and the laudable endeavor to employ the pecul- 
iar characteristics of different languages in rendering natural 
descriptions clear and distinct. We are indebted to modern 
cultivation for a constantly-advancing enlargement of our field 
of view, an increasing accumulation of ideas and feelings, and 
the powerful influence of their mutual reaction. Without 
eaving the land of our birth, we not only learn to know how 
the earth's surface is fashioned in the remotest zones, and by 
what animal and vegetable forms it is occupied, but we may 
even hope to have delineations presented to us which shall 
vividly reflect, in some degree at least, the impressions con- 
veyed by the aspect of external nature to the inhabitants of 
those distant regions. To satisfy this demand, to comply with 
a requirement that may be termed a species of intellectual 
enjoyment wholly unknown to antiquity, is an object for which 
modern times are striving, and it is an object which will be 
crowned with success, since it is the common work of all civ- 
ilized nations, and because the greater perfection of the means 
of communication by sea and land renders the whole earth 
more accessible, and facilitates the comparison of the most 
widely-separated parts. 

I have here attempted to indicate the direction in which 



80 COSMOS. 

the power possessed by the observer of representing what he 
has seen, the animating influence of the descriptive element, 
and the miiltiphcation and enlargement of views opened to us 
on the vast theater of natural forces, may all serve as means 
of encouraging the scientific study of nature, and enlarging its 
domain. The writer who, in our German literature, accord- 
ing to my opinion, has most vigorously and successfully opened 
this path, is my celebrated teacher and friend, George Forster. 
Through him began a new era of scientific voyages, the aim 
of which was to arrive at a knowledge of the comparative 
history and geography of different countries. Gifted with del- 
icate aesthetic feelings, and retaining a vivid impression of the 
pictures with which Tahiti and the other then happy islands 
of the Pacific had filled his imagination, as in recent times 
that of Charles Darwin,* George Forster was the first to de- 
pict in pleasing colors the changing stages of vegetation, the 
relations of climate and of articles of food in their influence 
on the civilization of mankind, according to differences of orig- 
inal descent and habitation. All that can give truth, indi- 
viduality, and distinctiveness to the delineation of exotic na- 
ture is united in liis works. We trace, not only in his admi- 
rable description of Cook's second voyage of discovery, but 
still more in his smaller writings, the germ of that richer fruit 
which has since been matured. f But alas I even to his noble, 
sensitive, and ever-hopeful spirit, life yielded no happiness. 

If the appellation of descriptive and landscape poetry has 
sometimes been applied, as a term of disparagement, to those 
descriptions of natural objects and scenes which in recent 
times have so greatly embellished the literature of Germany, 
France, England, and America, its application, in this sense, 
must be referred only to the abuse of the supposed enlarge- 
ment of the domain of art. Rhythmical descriptions of natu- 
ral objects, as presented to us by Delille, at the close of a 
long and honorably-spent career, can not be considered as 
poems of nature, using the term in its strictest definition, not- 
withstanding the expenditure of refined rules of diction and 
versification. They are wanting in poetic inspiration, and 
consequently strangers to the domain of poetry, and are cold 
and dry, as all niust be that shines by mere external polish. 

* See Journal and RemarJcs, by Charles Darwin, 1832-1836, in the 
Narrative of ike Voyages of the Adventure and Beagle, vol. iii., p. 479- 
490, where there occurs an extremely beautiful description of Tahiti. 

t On the merit of George Forster as a man and a writer, see Gervinns, 
Gcsch. dcr Poet. National-Litteratur der DaUschei„, tli v., s. 3i&gt;0-392 



MODERN TRAVELERS. HI 

But when the so-called descriptive poetry is justly blamed as 
an independent form of art, such disapprobation does not cer- 
tainly apply to an earnest endeavor to convey to the minds of 
others, by the force of well-apphed words, a distinct image of 
the results yielded by the richer mass of modern knowledge. 
Ought any means to be left unemployed by which an ani- 
mated picture of a distant zone, untraversed by ourselves, may 
be presented to the mind with all the vividness of truth, en- 
abling us even to enjoy some portion of the pleasure derived 
from the immediate contact with nature ? The Arabs ex- 
press themselves no less truly than metaphorically when they 
say that the best description is that by which the ear is con- 
verted into an eye.* It is one of the evils of the present day 
that an unhappy tendency to vapid poetic prose and to senti- 
mental effusions has infected simultaneously, in difierent coun- 
tries, even the style of many justly celebrated travelers and 
writers on natural history. Extravagances of this nature are 
so much the more to be regretted, where the style degenerates 
into rhetorical bombast or morbid sentimentality, either from 
want of literary cultivation, or more particularly from the ab- 
sence of all genuine emotion. 

Descriptions of nature, I would again observe, may be de- 
fined with sufficient sharpness and scientific accuracy, without 
on that account being deprived of the vivifying breath of im- 
agination. The poetic element must emanate from the in- 
tuitive perception of the connection between the sensuous and 
the intellectual, and of the universality and reciprocal limita- 
tion and unity of all the vital forces of nature. The more 
elevated the subject, the more carefully should all external 
adornments of diction be avoided. The true effect of a picture 
of nature depends on its composition ; every attempt at an ar- 
tificial appeal from the author must therefore necessarily ex- 
ert a disturbing influence. He who, familiar with the great 
works of antiquity, and secure in the possession of the riches 
of his native language, knows how to represent with the sim- 
plicity of individualizing truth that which he has received 
from his own contemplation, will not fail in producing the im- 
pression he seeks to convey ; for, in describing the boundless- 
ness of nature, and not the limited circuit of his own mind, 
he is enabled to leave to others unfettered freedom of feeling. 

It is not, however, the vivid description of the richly-adorned 
lands of the equinoctial zone, in which intensity of light and 
of humid heat accelerates and heightens the development of 
* Frey tag's Darstelhmg der Arahischen Versknnst, 1830, s. 402. 

D 2 



62 COSMOS 

all organic germs, that has alone imparted the powerful at- 
traction which in the present day is attached to the study of 
all branches of natural science. This secret charm, excited 
by a deep insight into organic life, is not limited to the trop- 
ical world. Every portion of the earth offers to our view the 
wonders of progressive formation and development, according 
to ever-recurring or shghtly-deviating types. Universal is the 
awful rule of those natural powers which, amid the clouds that 
darken the canopy of heaven with storms, as well as in the 
delicate tissues of organic substances, resolve the ancient strife 
of the elements into accordant harmony. All portions of the 
vast circuit of creation — from the equator to the coldest zones 
— wherever the breath of spring unlblds a blossom, the mind 
may rejoice in the inspiring power of nature. Our German 
land is especially justified in cherishing such a belief, for where 
is the southern nation who would not envy us the great mas- 
ter of poesy, whose works are all pervaded by a profound vener- 
ation for nature, which is ahke discernible in The Sorrows oj 
Wcrther, in the Recollections of Italy, in the Metamorphoses 
of Plants, and in so many of his poems ? Who has more elo- 
quently excited his cotemporaries to " solve the holy problem 
of the universe," and to renew the bond which in. the dawn 
of mankind united together philosophy, physics, and poetry ? 
Who has drawn others with a more powerful attraction to 
that land, the home of his intellect, where, as he sings, 

Ein sanfter Wind vora blauem Himmel weht, 
Die Myrte still, und hoch der Lorbeer steht! 



LANDSCAPE PAINTING IN ITS INFLUENCE ON THE STUDY OF NATURE. 
—GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION OF THE PHYSIOGNOMY OF PLANTS. 
—THE CHARACTER AND ASPECT OF VEGETATION IN DIFFERENT 
ZONES. 

Landscape painting, and fresh and vivid descriptions of 
nature, alike conduce to heighten the charm emanating from 
d study of the external world, which is shown us in all its di- 
versity of form by both, while both are alike capable, in a 
greater or lesser degree, according to the success of the at- 
tempt, to combine the visible and invisible in our contempla- 
tion of nature. The effort to connect these several elements 
forms the last and noblest aim of delineative art, but the pres- 
ent pages, from the scientific object to which they are devoted, 
must be restricted to a different point of view. Landscape- 
painting can not, therefore, ])e noticed in any further relation 



liANDSC'APE PAINTING. 83 

than that of its representation of the physiognomy and char- 
acter of different portions of the earth, and as it increases the 
desire for the prosecution of distant travels, and thus incites 
men in an equally instructive and charming manner to a free 
communion with nature. 

In that portion of antiquity which we specially designate 
as classical, landscape painting, as well as poetic delineationa 
of places, could not, from the direction of the Greek and Ro- 
man mind, he regarded as an independent branch of art. Both 
were considered merely as accessories ; landscape painting 
being for a long time used only as the back-ground of historical 
compositions, or as an accidental decoration for painted walls. 
In a similar manner, the epic poet delineated the locality of 
some historical occurrence by a picturesque description of the 
landscape, or of the back-ground, I would say, if I may be 
permitted here again to use the term, in front of which the 
acting personages move. The history of art teaches us how 
gradually the accessory parts have been converted into the 
main subject of description, and how landscape painting has 
been separated from historical painting, and gradually estab- 
lished as a distinct form ; and, lastly, how human figures were 
employed as mere secondary parts to some mountain or forest 
scene, or in some sea or garden view. The separation of these 
two species — historical and landscape painting — has been thus 
effected by gradual stages, which have tended to favor the 
advance of art through all the various phases of its develop- 
ment. It has been justly remarked, that painting generally 
remained subordinate to sculpture among the ancients, and 
that the feeling for the picturesque beauty of scenery which 
the artist endeavors to reproduce from his canvas was un 
known to antiquity, and is exclusively of modern origin. 

Graphic indications of the peculiar characteristics of a lo- 
cality must, however, have been discernible in the most an- 
cient paintings of the Greeks, as instances of which we may 
mention (if the testimony of Herodotus be correct)* that Man- 
drocles of Samos caused a large painting of the passage of the 
army over the Bosporus to be executed for the Persian king.l 
and that Polygnotus painted the fall of Trey in the Lesche at 

• Herod., iv., 88. 

t A portion of the works of Polygnotus and Mikon (the painting of 
the battle of Marathon in the Pokile at Athens) was, according to the 
testimony of Hin&gt;erius, still to be seen at the end of the fourth century 
(of our era), consequently when they had been executed 850 years 
^Letronne, Le.ttressurl^ Peinlnre Historique Murale, 1835, p. 202 and 
433.&gt; 



&lt;S4 COSMOS. 

Delphi. Among the paintings described by the elder Philos- 
tratus, mention is made of a landscape in which smoke was 
seen to rise from the summit of a volcano, and lava streams 
to flow into the neighboring sea. In this very complicated 
composition of a view of seven islands, the most recent com- 
mentators* think they can recognize the actual representation 
of the volcanic district of the ^olian or Lipari Islands north 
of Sicily. The perspective scenic decorations, which were 
made to heighten the effect of the representation of the mas- 
ter-works of -^schylus and Sophocles, gradually enlarged this 
branch of artf by increasing the demand for an illusive imita- 
tion of inanimate objects, as buildings, woods, and rocks. 

In consequence of the greater perfection to which scenog- 
raphy had attained, landscape painting passed among the 
Greeks and their imitators, the Romans, from the stage to 
their halls, adorned with columns, where the long ranges of 
wali were covered at first with more circumscribed views,| 
but shortly afterward with extensive pictures of cities, sea- 
shores, and wide tracts of pasture land, on which flocks were 
grazing. § Although the Roman painter Ludius, who lived 
in the Angustan age, can not be said to have invented these 
graceful decorations, he yet made them generally popular, II 
animating them by the addition of small figures. If Almost at 
the same period, and probably even half a century earlier, we 
find landscape painting mentioned as a much-practiced art 
among the Indians during the brilliant epoch of Vikramaditya. 

* Philostratorum Imagines, ed. Jacobs et Welcker, 1825, p. 79 and 
485. Both the learned editors defend, against former suspicions, the 
authenticity of the description of the paintings contained in the ancient 
Neapolitan Pinacothek (Jacobs, p. xvii. and xlvi. ; Welcker, p. Iv. and 
xlvi.). Otfried MUller conjectures that Thilostratus's picture of the* 
islands (ii., 17), as well as that of the marshy district of the Bosporus 
(i., 9), and of the fishermen (i., 12 and 13), bore much resemblance, in 
their mode of representation, to the mosaic of Palestrina. Plato speaks, 
in the introductory part of Critias (p. 107), of landscape painting as 
the art of pictorially representing mountains, rivers, and forests. 

t Particularly through Agatharcus, or, at least, according to the tuIms 
he established. Aristot., Poet., iv., 16 ; Vitruv., lib. v., cap. 7 ; lib. vii. 
in Prffif. (ed. Alois Maxinius, 1836, t. i., p. 292 ; t. ii., p. 56). Com 
pare, also, Letronne's work, op. cit p. 271-280. 

X On Objects of Rhopographia, see Welcker adPhilostr. Imag., p. 397 

§ Vitruv., lib. vii., cap. 5 (t. ii., p. 91). 

II Hirt., Gesck. der bildenden Kunste bet den Allen, 1830, s. 332 ; Le 
tronne, p. 262 and 468. 

^ Ludius qui primus (?) instituit amoenissimam parietum picturani 
(Plin., XXXV., 10). The topiaria opera of Pliny, and the varielates topir- 
orum of Vitruvius, were small decorative landscape paintings. The 
passage quoted in the text of Kalidasa occurs in the Sakuntala. act vi 



LANDSCAPE PAINTING AMONG THE ANCIENTS. 85 

III the charming drama of SaJcuntala, the image of his belov- 
ed is shown to King Dushmanta, who is not satisfied with 
that alone, as he desires that " the artist should depict the 
places which were most dear to his beloved — the Malini Riv- 
er, with a sand- bank on which the red flamingoes are stand- 
ing ; a chain of hills skirting on the Himalaya, and gazelles 
resting on these hills." These requirements are not easy to 
comply with, and they at least indicate a belief in the practi- 
cability of executing such an intricate composition. 

In Rome, landscape painting was developed into a separate 
branch of art from the time of the Ceesars ; but, if we may 
judge from the many specimens preserved to us in the exca- 
vations of Herculaneum, Pompeii, and StabisB, these pictures 
of nature were frequently nothing more than bird's-eye views 
of the country, similar to maps, and more like a delineation 
of sea-port towns, villas, and artificially-arranged gardens, 
than the representation of free nature. That which may 
have been regarded as the habitably comfortable element in 
a landscape seems to have alone attracted the Greeks and 
Romans, and not that which we term the wild and romantic- 
Their imitations might be so far accurate as frequent disre- 
gard of perspective and a taste for artificial and conventional 
arrangement permitted, and their arabesque-like compositions, 
to which the critical Vitruvius was averse, often exhibited a 
rhythmically-recurring and well-conceived representation of 
animal and vegetable forms ; but yet, to borrow an expression 
of Otfried Miiller,*" " the vague and mysterious reflection of 
the mind, which seems to appeal to us from the landscape, 
appeared to the ancients, from the peculiar bent of their feel- 
ings, as incapable of artistic development, and their delinea 
tions were sketched with more of sportiveness than earnest 
ness and sentiment." 

We have thus indicated the analogy which existed in the 
process of development of the two means — descriptive, diction 

* Otfried Miiller, Archdologie der Kunst, 1830, s. 609. Having al- 
ready spoken in the text of the paintings found in Pompeii and Hercu- 
laneum as being compositions but little allied to the freedom of nature, 
I must here notice some exceptions, which may be considered as land- 
scapes in the strict modern sense of the word. See Pitture d'Ercolano, 
vol. ii., tab. 45 ; vol. iii., tab. 53 ; and, as back-grounds in charming 
historical compositions, vol. iv., tab. 61, 62, and 63. I do not refer to 
the remarkable representation in the Monv.menti delV Instiiuto di Cor- 
rispondenza Archeologica, vol. iii., tab. 9, since its genuine antiquity 
has already been called in question by Raoal Rochette, an archaeologist 
of much acuteness of observation. 



6t&gt; COSMOS. 

and graphical representations — by which the attempt to ren? 
der the impressions produced by the aspect of nature appre- 
ciable to the sensuous faculties has gradually attained a car 
tain degree of independence. 

The specimens of ancient landscape painting in the manner 
of Ludius, which have been recovered from the excavations at 
Pompeii (lately renewed with so happy a result), belong most 
probably to a single and very short period, viz., that interven- 
ing between Nero and Titus,* for the city had been entirely 
destroyed by an earthquake only sixteen years before the cele 
brated eruption of Vesuvius. 

The character of the subsequent style of painting practiced 
by the early Christians remained nearly allied to that of the 
true Greek and Roman schools of art from the time of Con- 
stantine the Great to the beginning of the Middle Ages. A 
rich mine of old memorials is opened to us in the miniatures 
which adorn splendid and well-preserved manuscripts, and in 
the rarer mosaics of the same period.! Rumohr makes men- 
tion of a Psalter in the Barberina Library at Rome, where, 
in a miniature, David is represented "playing the harp, and 
surrounded by a pleasant grove, from the branches of which 
nymphs look forth to listen. This personification testifies to 
the antique nature of the M^hole picture." Since the middle 
jf the sixth century, when Italy was impoverished and polit- 
'^cally disturbed, the Byzantine art in the Eastern empire still 
preserved the lingering echoes and types of a better epoch. 
Such memorials as these form the transition to the creations 

* In refutation of the supposition of Du Theil ( Voyage en Italie, par 
I'Abbe Barthelemy, p. 284) that Pompeii still existed in splendor un- 
der Adrian, and was not completely destroyed till toward the close of 
the fifth century, see Adolph von Hoff, Geschichte der Verdnderungen 
der Erdoberjldche, th. ii., 1824, s. 195-199. 

t See Waagen, Kunstjcerke und Kunstler in England und Paris, th. 
iii., 1839, 8. 195-201 ; and particularly s. 217-224, where he describes 
the celebrated Psalter of the tenth century (in the Paris Libi'ary), which 
proves how long the " antique mode of composition" maintained itself 
in Constantinople. I was indebted to the kind and valuable communi- 
cations of this profound connoisseur of art CProfessor Waagen, director 
of the Gallery of Paintings of my native city), at the time of my public 
lectures in 1828, for interesting notices on the history of art after the 
period of the Roman empire. What I afterward wrote on the gradual 
development of landscape painting, I communicated in Dresden, in 
the winter of 1835, to Baron von Rumohr, the distinguished and too 
early deceased author of the Italienische Forschungen. I received 
from this excellent man a great number of historical illustrations, which 
h3 even permitted me to publish if the form of my work should rendei 
It expedient. 



THE BROTHERS VAN EYCK. 97 

pt the later Middle Ages, when the love for illuminated man- 
uscripts had spread from Greece, in the East, through south- 
ern and westeri* lands into the Frankish monarchy, among 
the Anglo-Saxons and the inhabitants of the Netherlands. 
It is, therefore, a fact of no slight importance for the history 
of modern art, that " the celebrated brothers Hubert and Jo- 
hann van Eyck belonged essentially to a school of miniature 
pan iters, which, since the last half of the fourteenth century, 
attained to a high degree of perfection in Flanders."* 

The historical paintings of the brothers Van Eyck present 
us with the first instances of carefully-executed landscapes. 
Neither of them ever visited Italy, but the younger brother, 
Johann, enjoyed the opportunity of seeing the vegetation of 
Southern Europe when, in the year 1428, he accompanied the 
embassy which Philip the Good, duke of Burgundy, sent to 
Lisbon when he sued for the hand of the daughter of King 
John I. of Portugal. In the Museum of Berlin are preserved 
the wings of the famous picture which the above-named cele- 
brated painters — the actual founders of the great Flemish 
school — executed for the Cathedral at Ghent. On these wings, 
which represent holy hermits and pilgrims, Johann van Eyck 
has embellished the landscape with orange and date trees and 
cypresses, which, from their extreme truth to nature, impart 
a solemn and imposing character to the other dark masses in 
the picture. One feels, on looking at this painting, that the 
artist must himself have received the impression of a vegeta- 
tion fanned by gentle breezes. 

In considering the master- works of the brothers Van Eyck, 
we have not advanced beyond the first half of the fifteenth 
century, when the more highly-perfected style of oil painting, 
which was only just beginning to replace painting in tempera, 
had already attained to a high degree of technical perfection. 
The taste for a vivid representation of natural forms was 
awakened, and, if we would trace the gradual extension and 
elevation of this feeling for nature, we must bear in mind that 
Antonio di Messina, a pupil of the brothers Van Eyck, trans- 
planted the predilection for landscape painting to Venice, and 
that the pictures of the Van Eyck school exercised a similar 
action in Florence on Domenico Ghirlandaio and other mas- 
ters.t The artists at this epoch directed their efforts to a care- 

* Waagen, op. cit., th. i., 1837, s. 59 ; th. iii., 1839, s. 352-359. [See 
Lanzi's History of Painting, Bohii's Standard Library, 1847, vol. i., p 
61-8V.-)— Tr. 

+ ' 1 iutaricchio painted rich and well-composed landscapes as inde 



88 COSMOS. 

ful but almost timid imitation of nature, and the master- worki 
of Titian afford the earliest evidence of freedom and grandeur 
in the representation of natural scenes ; but* in this respect, 
also, Giorgione seems to have served as a model for that great 
painter. I had the opportunity for many years of admiring 
in the gallery of the Louvre at Paris that picture of Titian 
which represents the death of Peter Martyr, overpowered in 
a forest by an Albigense, in the presence of another Domini- 
can monk.* The form of the forest-trses, and their foliage, 
the mountainous and blue distance, the tone of coloring, and 
the lights glowing through the whole, leave a solemn impres- 
sion of the earnestness, grandeur, and depth of feelings which 
pervade this simple landscape composition. So vivid was 
Titian's admiration of nature, that not only in the pictures of 
beautiful women, as in the back-ground of his exquisitely- 
formed Venus in the Dresden Gallery, but also in those of a 
graver nature, as, for instance, in his picture of the poet Pie- 
tro Aretino, he painted the surrounding landscape and sky in 
harmony with the individual character of the subject. Anni- 
bal Caracci and Domenichino, in the Bolognese school, adhered 
faithfully to this elevation of style. If, however, the great 
epoch of historical painting belong to the sixteenth century, 

pendent decorations, in the Belvidere of the Vatican. He appears to 
have exercised an influence on Raphael, in whose paintings there are 
many landscape peculiarities which can not be traced to Perugino. In 
Pinturicchio and his friends we also already meet with those singular, 
pointed forms of mountains which, in your lectures, you were disposed 
to derive from the Tyrolese dolomitic cones which Leopold von Buch 
has rendered so celebrated, and which may have produced an impres- 
sion on travelers and artists from the constant intercourse existing be^ 
tween Italy and Germany. I am more inclined to believe that these 
conical forms in the earliest Italian landscapes are either very old con- 
ventional modes of representing mountain forms in antique bass-reliefs 
and mosaic works, or that they must be regarded as unskillfully fore- 
shortened views of Soracte and similarly isolated mountains in the Cam- 
pagna di Roma." (From a letter addressed to me by Carl Friedrich 
von Rumohr, in October, 1832.) In order to indicate more precisely 
the conical and pointed mountains in question, I would refer to the fan- 
ciful landscape which forms the back-ground in Leonardo da Vinci's 
universally admired picture of Mona Lisa (the consort of Francesco del 
Giocondo). Among the artists of the Flemish school who have more 
particularly developed landscape painting as a sepai'ate branch of art, 
we must name Patenier's successor, Henry de Bles, named Civetta from 
his animal monogram, and subsequently the brothers Matthew and Paul 
Bril, who excited a strong taste in favor of this particular branch of art 
during their sojourn in Rome. In Germany, Albrecht Altdorfer, Durer's 
pupil, practiced landscape painting even somewhat earlier and wirb 
greater success than Patenier. 

* Painted for the Church of San Giovanni e Paolo at Venice. 



LANDSCAPE PAINTING OP 16TH AND 17tH CENTURIES. 89 

that of landscape painting appertains undoubtedly to the sev- 
enteenth. As the riches of nature became more known and 
more carefully observed, the feeling of art was likewise able 
to extend itself over a greater diversity of objects, while, at 
the same time, the means of technical representation had si- 
multaneously been brought to a higher degree of perfection. 
The relations between the inner tone of feelings and the de- 
lineation of external nature became more intimate, and, by 
the links thus established between the two, the gentle and 
mild expression of the beautiful in nature was elevated, and, 
as a consequence of this elevation, belief in the power of the 
external world over the emotions of the mind was simultane- 
ously awakened. When this excitement, in conformity with 
the noble aim of all art, converts the actual into an ideal ob- 
ject of fancy ; when it arouses within our minds a feeling of 
harmonious repose, the enjoyment is not unaccompanied by 
emotion, for the heart is touched whenever we look into the 
depths of nature or of humanity. =^ In the same century we 
find thronged together Claude Lorraine, the idyllic painter of 
light and aerial distance ; Ruysdael, with his dark woodland 
scenes and lowering skies ; Gaspard and Nicolas Poussin, with 
their nobly-delineated forms of trees ; and Everdingen, Hob- 
bima, and Cuyp, so true to life in their delineations.! 

In this happy period of the development of art, a noble effort 
was manifested to introduce all the vegetable forms yielded by 
the North of Europe, Southern Italy, and the Spanish Penin 
sula. The landscape was embellished with oranges and lau- 
rels, with pines and date-trees ; the latter (which, with the 
exception of the small Chamajrops, originally a native of Eu- 
ropean sea-shores, was the only member of the noble family 
of palms known from personal observation) was generally rep- 
resented as having a snake-like and scaly trunk, $ and long 

* Wilhelra von Humboldt, Gesammelte WerJce, bd. iv., s. 37. See 
also, on the different gradations of the life of nature, and on the tone of 
mind awakened by the landscape around, Cams, in his interesting work, 
Briefen icber die Landschaftmalerei, 1831, s. 45. 

t The great century of painting comprehended the works of Johanu 
Breughel, 1569-1625; Rubens, 1577-1640; Domenichino, 1581-1641; 
PhiHppe de Champaigne, 1602-1674 ; Nicolas Poussin, 1594-1655 ; Gas- 
par Poussin (Dughet), 1613-1675 ; Chiude Lorraine, 1600-168'2 ; Albert 
Cuyp, 1606-1672; Jan Both, 1610-1650; Salvator Rosa, 1615-1673; 
Everdingen, 1621-1675; Nicolaus Berghem, 1624-1683; Swaneveit, 
1620-1690; Ruysdael, 1635-1681; Minderhoot Hobbima, JanWynants, 
Adriaan van de Velde, 1639-1672 ; Carl Dujardin, 1644-1 687. _ 

X Some strangely-fanciful representations of date palms, which hava 
a knob in the middle of the leafy crown, are to be seen in an old pia 



90 COSMOS. 

served as the representative of tropical vegetation, as, in like 
manner, Pinus pinea is even still very generally supposed to 
furnish an exclusive characteristic of the vegetable Ibrms ot 
Italy. The contour of high mountain chains was but little 
studied, and snow-covered peaks, which projected beyond the 
green Alpine meadows, were, at that period, still regarded by 
naturalists and landscape painters as inaccessible. The phys- 
iognomy of rocky masses seems scarcely to have excited any 
attempt at accurate representation, excepting where a water- 
fall broke in foam over the mountain side. We may here re- 
mark another instance of the diversity of comprehension man- 
ifested by a free and artistic spirit in its intimate communion 
with nature. Rubens, who, in his great hunting pieces, had 
depicted the fierce movements of wild animals with inimita- 
ble animation, succeeded, as the delineator of historical events, 
in representing, with equal truth and vividness, the form of 
the landscape in the waste and rocky elevated plain surround- 
ing the Escurial.* 

The delineation of natural objects included in the branch of 
art at present under consideration could not have gained in 
diversity and exactness until the geographical field of view 
became extended, the means of traveling in foreign countries 
facilitated, and the appreciation of the beauty and configura- 
tion of vegetable forms, and their arrangement in groups of 
natural families, excited. The discoveries of Columbus, Vasco 
de Gama, and Alvarez Cabral, in Central America, Southern 
Asia, and the Brazils ; the extensive trade in spices and drugs 
carried on by the Spaniards, Portuguese, Italians, and Flem- 
ings, and the establishment of botanical gardens at Pisa, Pad- 
ua, and Bologna, between 1544 and 1568, although not yet 
furnished with hot-houses properly feo called, certainly made 
artists acquainted with many remarkable forms of exotic prod- 
ucts, including even some that belong to a tropical vegeta- 
tion. Single fruits, flowers, and branches were painted with 
much natural truth and grace by Johann Breughel, whose 
reputation had been already established before the close of the 
sixteenth century ; but it is not until the middle of the seven- 
teenth century that we meet with landscapes which reproduce 
the individual character of the torrid zone, as impressed upon 
the artist's mind by actual observation. The merit of the 
earliest attempt at such a mode of representation belongs prob- 
ably, as I find from Waagen, to the Flemish painter Franz 

ture of Cima da Conegliano, of the school of Belliuo (Dresden Gallery 
1835, No. 40) * Dresden Gallery, No. 917. 



r^ANUSCAPE PAINTERS OF THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY. 9» 

Post, of Haarlem, who accompanied Prince Maurice of Nas- 
sau to Brazil, where that prince, who took great interest in all 
Bubjects connected with the tropical world, was Dutch stadt- 
holder, in the conquered Portuguese possessions, from 1637 to 
1644. Post continued for many years to make studies from 
nature at Cape St. Augustine, in the Bay of All Saints, on 
the shores of the River St. Francisco, and at the lower course 
of the Amazon.* These studies he himself partly executed 

* Franz Post, or Poost, was born at Haarlem in 1620, and died there 
in 1680. His brother also accompanied Count Maurice of Nassau as 
an architect. Of the paintings, some representing the banks of the 
Amazon are to be seen in the picture gallery at Schleisheim, while 
others are at Berlin, Hanover, and Prague. The line engravings in 
Barlaus, Reise des Prinzen Montz von Nassau, and in the royal collec- 
tion of copper-plate prints at Berlin, evince a fine conception of nature 
in depicting the form of the coast, the nature of the gi'ound, and the 
vegetation. They represent Musacefe, Cacti, palms, different species 
of Ficus, with the well-known board-like excrescences at the foot of 
the stem, Rhizophora?, and arborescent grasses. The picturesque Bra 
zilian voyage is made to terminate (plate iv.), singularly enough, with 
a German forest of pines which surround the castle of Dillenburg. The 
remark in the text, on the influence which the establishment of botanic 
gardens in Upper Italy, toward the middle of the sixteenth century, 
may have exercised on the knowledge of the physiognomy of tropical 
forms of vegetation, leads me here to draw attention to the well-founded 
fact that, in the thirteenth century, Albertus Magnus, who was equally 
energetic in promoting the Aristotelian philosophy and the pursuit of 
the science of nature, probably had a hot-house in the convent of the 
Dominicans at Cologne. This celebrated man, who was suspected of 
sorcery on account of his speaking machine, entertained the King of 
the Romans, William of Holland, on his passage through Cologne on the 
6th of January, 1259, in a large space in the convent garden, where he 
preserved fruit-trees and plants in flower throughout the winter by 
maintaining a pleasant degree of heat. The account of this banquet, 
exaggerated into something marvelous, occurs in the Chronica Joannis 
de Beka, written in the middle of the fourteenth century (Beka et Heda 
de Episcopis UUrajectinis, recogn. ab. Arn. Buchelio, 1643, p. 79 ; Jour- 
dain, Recherches Criiiqnes snr V Age des Traductions d'Ai'isiote, 1819, 
p. 331 ; Buhle, Gesch. der Philosophic, th. v., s. 296). Although the 
ancients, as we find from the excavations at Pompeii, made use of 
panes of glass in buildings, yet nothing has been found to indicate the 
use of glass or hot houses in ancient horticulture. The mode of con- 
ducting heat by the caldaria into baths might have led to the construc- 
tion of such forcing or hot houses, but the shortness of the Greek and 
Italian winters must have caused the want of artificial heat to l)e less 
felt in horticulture. The Adonis gardens {Kfjizot kduvUo^), so indica- 
tive of the meaning of the festival of Adonis, consisted, according to 
B5ckh, of plants in small pots, which were, no doubt, intended to rep. 
resent the garden whore Aphrodite met Adonis, who was the symbol 
of the quickly-fading bloom of youth, of luxuriant growth, and of rapid 
decay. The festivals of Adonis were, therefore, seasons of solemn 
ameutations for women, and belonged to the festivals in which the ao- 



92 COSMOS. 

as paintings, and partly etched with much spirit lr» this 
period belong the realarkably la,rge oil pictures preserved in 
Denmark, in a gallery of the beautiful palace of Frederiks 
borg, which were painted by Eckhout, who, in 1641, was also 
on the Brazilian coast with Prince Maurice of Nassau. In 
these compositions, palms, papaws, bananas, and heliconias 
are most characteristically delineated, as are also brightly-plu- 
maged birds, and small quadrupeds, and the form and appear 
ance of the natives. 

These examples of a delineation of the physiognomy of nat- 
ural scenery were not followed by many artists of merit before 
Cook's second voyage of circumnavigation. What Hodges did 
for the western islands of the Pacific, and my distinguished 
countryman, Ferdinand Bauer, for New Holland and Van 
Diemen's Land, has been since done, in more recent times, on 
a far grander scale, and in a masterly manner, by Moritz 
Kugendas, Count Clarac, Ferdinand Bellermann, and Edward 
Hildebrandt ; and for the tropical vegetation of America, and 
for many other parts of the earth, by Heinrich von Kittlitz, 
the companion of the Russian Admiral Liitke, on his voyage 
of circumnavigation.* 

cients lamented the decay of nature. As I have spoken in the text of 
hot-house plants in contrast with those which grow naturally, I would 
add that the ancients frequently used the term " Adonis gardens" pro- 
verbially, to indicate something which had shot up rapidly, without 
{)romise of perfect maturity or duration. These plants, which were 
ettuce, fennel, barley, and wheat, and not variegated flowers, were 
forced, by extreme care, into rapid growth in summer (and not in the 
winter), and were often made to grow to maturity in a period of only 
eisi;ht days. Creuzer, in his Symbolik nnd Mythologie, 1841, th. ii., s. 
427, 430, 479, und 481, supposes '* that strong natural and artificial heat, 
in the room in which they were placed, was used to hasten the growth 
of plants in the Adonis gardens." The garden of the Dominican con- 
vent at Cologne reminds us of the Greenland or Icelandic convent of 
St. Thomas, where the garden was kept free from snow by being 
warmed by natural thermal springs, as is related by the brothers Zeni, 
in the account of their travels (1388-1404), which, from the geograph- 
ical localities indicated, must be considered as very problematical. 
(Compare Zurla, ViaggiatoH Veneziani, t. ii., p. 63-69 ; and Humboldt, 
Examen Critique de VHist. de la Giographie, t. ii., p. 127.) The intro- 
duction in our botanic gardens of regular hot-houses seems to be of 
more recent date than is generally supposed. Ripe pine-apples were 
first obtained at the end of the seventeenth century (Beckmann's Jfis- 
tory of Inventions, Bohn's Standard Library, 1846, vol. i., p. 103-106); 
and Linnaeus even asserts, in the Musa Cliffortiana fiorens Hartecampi 
that the first banana which flowered in Europe was in 1731, at Vienna 
iu the garden of Prince Eugene. 

* These views of tropical vegetation, which designate the " physicg 
uomy of plants," conslitute, in the Royal Museum at Berlin (in the de 



DELINEATIONS OF NATURAL SCENERY. 93 

He who, with a keen appreciation of the beauties of nature 
manifested in mountains, rivers, and forest glades, has himself 
traveled over the torrid zone, and seen the luxuriance and di- 
versity of Vegetation, not only on the cultivated sea-coasts, 
but on the declivities of the snow-crowned Andes, the Hima- 
laya, or the Nilgherry Mountains of Mysore, or in the primi- 
tive forests, amid the net-work of rivers lying between the 
Orinoco and the Amazon, can alone feel what an inexhausti- 
ble treasure remains still unopened by the landscape painter 
between the tropics in both continents, or in the island-world 
of Sumatra, Borneo, and the PhiHppines ; and how all the 
spirited and admirable efforts already made in this portion of 
art fall far short of the magnitude of those riches of nature of 
which it may yet become possessed. Are we not justified in 
hoping that landscape painting wdll flourish with a new and 
hitherto unknown brilliancy when artists of merit shall more 
frequently pass the narrow limits of the Mediterranean, and 
when they shall be enabled, far in the interior of continents, 
in the humid mountain valleys of the tropical world, to seize, 
with the genuine freshness of a pure and youthful spirit, on 
the true image of the varied forms of nature ? 

These noble regions have hitherto been visited mostly by 
travelers whose want of artistical education, and whose differ- 
ently directed scientific pursuits afforded few opportunities of 
their perfecting themselves in landscape painting. Only very 
few among them have been susceptible of seizing on the total 
impression of the tropical zone, in addition to the botanical in- 
terest excited by the individual forms of flowers and leaves. 
It has frequently happened that the artists appointed to ac- 
company expeditions fitted out at the national expense have 
been chosen without due consideration, and almost by acci- 
dent, and have been thus found less prepared than such ap- 
pointments required ; and the end of the voyage may thus 
have drawn near before even the most talented among them, 
by a prolonged sojourn among grand scenes of nature, and by 
frequent attempts to imitate what they saw, had more than 

partment of miniatures, drawings, and engravings), a treasure of art 
which, owing to its peculiarity and picturesque variety, is incomparably 
superior to any other collection. The title of the papers edited by Von 
Kittlitz is Ve gelations- Ansichten der Kustenldnder und Jnseln dcs stulen 
Oceans, avfgeaommen 1827-1829, auf der Entdeckungs-reise der kais. 
Russ. Corvette Senjdwin (Siegen, 1844). There is also great fidelity to 
nature in the drawings of Carl Bodnier, which are engraved in a mas- 
terly manner, and which greatly embellish the large work of the trav- 
els of Prince Max* -uiUan of Wied in the interior of North America. 



94 COSMOS. 

begun to acquire a certain technical mastery of tlieir art. 
Voyages of circumnavigation are, besides, but seldom of a 
character to allow of artists visiting any extensive tracts of 
forest land, the upper courses of large rivers, or the summits 
of inland chains of mountains. 

Colored sketches, taken directly from nature, are the only 
means by which the artist, on his return, may reproduce the 
character of distant regions in more elaborately finished pic- 
tures ; and this object will be the more fully attained where 
the painter has, at the same time, drawn or painted directly 
fxom nature a large number of separate studies of the foliage 
of trees ; of leafy, flowering, or fruit-bearing stems ; of prostrate 
trunks, overgrown with Pothos and Orchidese ; of rocks and of 
portions of the shore, and the soil of the forest. The posses- 
sion of such correctly-drawn and well-proportioned sketches will 
enable the artist to dispense with all the deceptive aid of hot- 
house forms and so-called botanical delineations. 

A great event in the history of the world, such as the eman- 
cipation of Spanish and Portuguese America from the domin- 
ion of European rule, or the increase of cultivation in India, 
New Holland, the Sandwich Islands, and the southern colonies 
of Africa, will incontestably impart to meteorology and the de- 
scriptive natural sciences, as well as to landscape painting, a 
new impetus and a high tone of feeling, which probably could 
not have been attained independently of these local relations. 
In South America, populous cities lie at an elevation of nearly 
14,000 feet above the level of the sea. From these heights 
the eye ranges over all the climatic gradations of vegetable 
forms. What may we not, therefore, expect from a picturesque 
study of nature, if, after the settlement of social discord and 
the establishment of free institutions, a feeling of art shall at 
length be awakened in those elevated regions ? 

All that is expressed by the passions, and all that relates to 
the beauty of the human form, has attained its highest per- 
fection in the temperate northern zone under the skies of 
Greece and Italy. The artist, drawing from the depths of 
nature no less than from the contemplation of beings of his 
own species, derives the types of historical painting alike from 
free creation and from truthful imitation. Landscape paint- 
ing, though not simply an imitative art, has a more material 
origin and a more earthly limitation. It requires for its de 
velopment a large number of various and direct impressions, 
which, when received from external contemplation, must be 
fertilized by the powers of the mind, in order to be given back 



t^ANDSCAPE PAINTING. 95 

to the senses of others as a free work of art. The grander 
style of heroic landscape painting is the combined result of a 
profound appreciation of nature and of this inward process of 
the mind. 

Every where, in every separate portion of the earth, nature 
is indeed only a reflex of the whole. The forms of organisms 
recur again and again in different combinations. Even the 
icy north is cheered for months together by the presence of 
herbs, and large Alpine blossoms covering the earth, and by 
the aspect of a mild azure sky. Hitherto landscape painting 
among us has pursued her graceful labors familiar only with 
the simpler forms of our native floras, but not, on that account, 
without depth of feeling and richness of creative fancy. Dwell- 
ing only on the native and indigenous forms of our vegetation, 
this branch of art, notwithstanding that it has been circum- 
scribed by such narrow limits, has yet afibrded sufficient scope 
for highly-gifted painters, such as the Caracci, Gaspard Pous- 
sin, Claude Lorraine, and Ruysdael, to produce the loveliest 
and most varied creations of art, by their magical power of 
managing the grouping of trees and the effects of light and 
shade. That progress which may still be expected in the dif- 
ferent departments of art, and to which I have already drawn 
attention, in order to indicate the ancient bond which unites 
natural science with poetry and artistic feeling, can not im- 
pair the fame of the master works above referred to, for, as 
we have observed, a distinction must be made in landscape 
painting, as in every other branch of art, between the ele- 
ments generated by the more limited field of contemplation 
and direct observation, and those which spring from the 
boundless depth of feeling and from the force of idealizing 
mental power. The grand conceptions which landscape paint- 
ing, as a more or less inspired branch of the poetry of nature, 
owes to the creative power of the mind, are, like man himself, 
and the imaginative faculties with which he is endowed, inde- 
pendent of place. These remarks especially refer to the grada- 
tions in the forms of trees from Pwuysdael and Everdingen, 
through the works of Claiide Lorraine, to Poussin and Anni 
bal Caracci. In the great masters of art there is no indica 
tion of local limitation. But an extension of the visible hori 
zon, and an acquaintance with the nobler and grande/ forms 
of nature, and with the luxurious fullness of life in the tropical 
world, afford the advantage of not simply enriching the ma- 
terial ground- work of landscape painting, but also of inducing 
more vivid impressions in the minds of less highly-gifted 



!*6 cosM-js. 

painters, and thus heightening their powers of artistic crea- 
tion. 

I would here be permitted to refer to some remarks which 
I published nearly half a century ago in a treatise which has 
been but little read, entitled Idcen zit einer Fhysiognomik 
der Gewdchse* and which stands in the most intimate con- 
nection with the subject under consideration. He who com- 
prehends nature at a single glance, and knows how to abstract 
his mind from local phenomena, will easily perceive how or- 
ganic force and the abundance of vital development increase 
with the increase of warmth from the poles to the equator. 
This charming luxuriance of nature increases, in a lesser de- 
gree, from the north of Europe to the lovely shores of the 
Mediterranean than from the Iberian Peninsula, Southern 
Italy, and Greece, toward the tropics. The naked earth is 
covered with an unequally w^oven, flowery mantle, thicker 
where the sun rises high in a sky of deep azure, or is only 
vailed by light and feathery clouds, and thinner toward the 
gloomy north, where the returning frost too soon blights the 
opening bud or destroys the ripening fruit. While, in the cold 
zones, the bark of the trees is covered with dry moss or with 
lichens, the region of palms and of feathery arborescent ferns 
shows the trunks of Anacardia and of the gigantic species of 
Ficus embellished by Cymbidia and the fragrant Vanilla. 
The fresh green of the Dracontium, and the deeply-serrated 
leaves of the Pothos, contrast with the variegated blossoms of 
the Orchideee, while climbing Bauhinise, Passiflorae, and yel- 
!ow-blossomed Banisteriae, entwining the stems of forest trees, 
f.pread far and high in air, and delicate flowers are unfolded 
from the roots of the Theobromse, and from the thick and 
rough bark of the Crescentiee and the GustavisB. In the 
midst of this abundance of flowers and leaves, and this luxu- 
riantly wild entanglement of climbing plants, it is often diffi- 
cult for the naturalist to discover to which stem different 
(lowers aud leaves belong ; nay, one single tree adorned with 
Paullinise. Bignonise, and Dendrobia, presents a mass of vege- 
table forms which, if disentangled, would cover a considerable 
epace of ground. 

Each portion of the earth has, however, its peculiar and 

* Humboldt, Ansichten dcr Natur, 2te Ausgabe, 1826, bd. i., s. 7, 16, 
21, 36, and 42. Compare, also, two very instructive memoirs, Fried, 
rich von Martius, Pkysiognomie des PJlanzenreickes in Brasilien, 1824, 
and M. von Olfers, allgemeine Uebersicht von Brasilien, in Fcidner'i 
Ueiscn. 1828, th. i., s. 18-23. 



TEOPICAL SCENERY. 97 

characteristic beauty : to the tropics belong diversity and 
grandeur in the forms of plants ; to the north, the aspect of 
tracts of meadow-land, and the periodic and long-desired re- 
vival of nature at the earliest breath of the gentle breezes of 
spring. As in the Musacea3 (Pisang) we have the greatest 
expansion, so in the Casuarinee and in the needle-tree we have 
the greatest contraction of the leaf vessels. Firs, Thujae, and 
Cypresses constitute a northern flora which is very uncommon 
in the plains of the tropics. Their ever-verdant green enlivens 
the dreary winter landscape, and proclaims to the inhabitants 
of the north that, even when snow and ice have covered the 
ground, the inner life of vegetation, like Promethean fire, is 
never extinguished on our planet. 

Every zone of vegetation has, besides its own attractions, a 
peculiar character, which calls forth in us special impressions. 
Referring here only to our own native plants, I would ask, 
who does not feel himself variously affected beneath the som- 
ber shade of the beech, on hills crowned with scattered pines, 
or in the midst of grassy plains, where the wind rustles among 
the trembling leaves of the birch ? As in different organic 
beings we recognize a distinct physiognomy, and as descriptive 
botany and zoology are, in the strict definition of the words, 
merely analytic classifications of animal and vegetable forms, 
so there is also a certain physiognomy of nature exclusively 
peculiar to each portion of the earth. The idea which the 
artist wishes to indicate by the expressions " Swiss nature" or 
" Italian skies," is based on a vague sense of some local char- 
acteristic. The azure of the sky, the form of the clouds, the 
vapory mist resting in the distance, the luxuriant development 
of plants, the beauty of the foliage, and the outline of the 
mountains, are the elements which determine the total im- 
pression produced by the aspect of any particular region. To 
apprehend these characteristics, and to reproduce them visibly, 
is the province of landscape painting ; while it is permitted to 
the artist, by analyzing the various groups, to resolve beneath 
his touch the great enchantment of nature — if I may venture 
on so metaphorical an expression — as the written words of 
men are resolved into a few simple characters. 

But, even iu the present imperfect condition of pictorial de-^ 
lineations of landscapes, the engravings which accompany, and 
too often disfigure, our books of travels, have, however, con- 
tributed considerably toward a knowledge of the physiognomy 
of distant regions, to the taste for voyages in the tropical zones, 
and to a more active study of nature. The improvements in 

Vol. II.— E 



yo COSMOS. 

landscape painting on a large scale (as decorative pfvfntings, 
panoramas, dioramas, and neoramas) have also increased the 
generality and force of these impressions. The representations 
satirically described by Vitruvius and the Egyptian, Julius 
Pollux, as " exaggerated representations of rural adornments 
of the stage," and which, in the sixteenth century, were con- 
trived by Serlio's arrangement of Coulisses to increase the de- 
lusion, may now, since the discoveries of Prevost and Paguerre, 
be made, in Barker's panoramas, to serve, in some degree, as 
a substitute for traveling through different regions. Pano- 
ramas are more productive of effect than scenic decorations, 
since the spectator, inclosed, as it were, within a magical cir- 
cle, and wholly removed from all the disturbing influences of 
reality, may the more easily fancy that he is actually surround- 
ed by a foreign scene. These compositions give rise to im- 
pressions which, after many years, often become wonderfully 
interwoven with the feelings awakened by the aspect' of the 
Bcenes when actually beheld. Hitherto panoramas, which are 
alone effective when of considerable diameter, have been ap- 
plied more frequently to the representation of cities and in- 
habited districts than to that of scenes in which nature revels 
in wild luxuriance and richness of life. An enchanting effect 
might be produced by a characteristic delineation of nature, 
sketched on the rugged declivities of the Himalaya and the 
Cordilleras, or in the midst of the Indian or South American, 
river valleys, and much aid might be further derived by tak- 
ing photographic pictures, which, although they certainly can 
not give the leafy canopy of trees, would present the most 
perfect representation of the form of colossal trunks, and the 
characteristic ramification of the different branches. 

All these means, the enumeration of which is specially com- 
prised within the limits of the present work, are calculated to , 
raise the feeling of admiration for nature ; and I am of opinion 
that the knowledge of the works of creation, and an apprecia- 
tion of their exalted grandeur, would be powerfully increased 
if, besides museums, and thrown open, like them, to the pub- 
lic, a number of panoramic buildings, containing alternating 
pictures of landscapes of different geographical latitudes and 
from different zones of elevation, should be erected in our 
large cities. The conception of the natural unity and the 
feeling of the harmonious accord pervading the universe can 
not fail to increase in vividness among men, in proportion as 
the means are multiplied by which the phenomena of nature 
may be more characteristically and visibly manifested. 



CULTIVATION OF EXOTIC PLANTS. 



CULTIVATION OF TROPICAL PLANTS— CONTRAST AND ASSEMBLAGB 
OF VEGETABLE FORMS.-IMPRESSIONS INDUCED BY THE PHYSIOQ 
NOMY AND CHARACTER OP THE VEGETATION. 

Landscape painting, notwithstanding- the multiplication of 
its productions by engravings, and by the recent improvements 
in lithography, is still productive of a less powerful effect than 
that excited in minds susceptible of natural beauty by the im- 
mediate aspect of groups of exotic plants in hot-houses or in 
gardens. I have already alluded to the subject of my own 
youthful experience, and mentioned that the sight of a colossal 
dragon-tree and of a fan palm in an old tower of the botanical 
garden at Berlin implanted in my mind the seeds of an irre- 
sistible desire to undertake distant travels. He who is able 
to trace through the whole course of his impressions that which 
gave the first leading direction to his whole career, will not 
deny the influence of such a power. 

I would here consider the different impression produced by 
the picturesque arrangement of plants, and their association 
for the purposes of botanical exposition ; in the first place, by 
groups distinguished for their size and mass, as Musacese and 
Heliconiae, growing in thick clumps, and alternating with 
Corypha palms, Araucarise, and Mimosse, and moss-covered 
trunks, from which shoot forth Dracontia, delicately-leaved 
Ferns, and richly-blossoming Orchidese ; and, in the next, by 
an abundance of separate lowly plants, classed and cultivated 
in rows for the purpose of affording instruction in descriptive 
and systematic botany. In the first case, our attention is 
challenged by the luxuriant development of vegetation in 
Cecropise, Caroliniae, and light, feathery Bamboos ; by ths 
picturesque association of the grand and noble forms which 
embellish the shores of the Upper Orinoco, the wooded banks 
of the Amazon, or of the Huallaga, so vividly and admirably 
described by Martins and Edward Poppig ; and by the senti- 
ment of longing for the lands in which the current of life flows 
more abundantly and richly, and of whose beauty a faint but 
still pleasing image is reflected to the mind by means of our 
hot-houses, which originally served as mere nurseries for sick- 
ly plants. 

It undoubtedly enters within the compass of landscape 
painting to afford a richer and more complete picture of na- 
ture than the most skillfully-arranged grouping of cultivated 
plants is able to present, since this branch of art exercises an 
almost magical command over masses and forms. Almost 



100 COSMOS. 

anlimited in space, it traces the skirts of tlie forest till they 
are wholly lost in the aerial distance, dashes the mountain 
torrent from cliff to clif!^ and spreads the deep azure of the 
tropical sky alike over the summits of the lofty palms and 
over the waving grass of the plain that bounds the horizon. 
The luminous and colored effects imparted to all terrestrial 
objects by the light of the thinly- vailed or pure tropical sky, 
gives a peculiar and mysterious power to landscape painting, 
when the artist succeeds in reproducing this mild effect of light. 
The sky in the landscape has, from a profound appreciation 
for the nature of Greek tragedy, been ingeniously compared to 
the charm of the chorus in its general and mediative effect.* 

The multiplication of means at the command of painting 
for exciting the fancy, and concentrating the grandest phe- 
nomena of sea and land on a small space, is denied to our 
plantations and gardens, but this deficiency in the total effect 
is compensated for by the sway ^^hich reality every where 
exercises over the senses. When, in the Messrs. Loddiges' 
palm-house, or in the jPfauen-I?isel, near Potsdam (a monu- 
ment of the simple love of nature of my noble and departed 
sovereign), we look down from the high gallery in the bright 
noonday sun on the luxuriant reed and tree-like palms below, 
we feel, for a moment, in a state of complete delusion as to 
the locality to which we are transported, and we may even 
believe ourselves to be actually in a tropical climate, looking 
from the summit of a hill on a small grove of palms. It is 
true that the aspect of the deep azure of the sky, and the im- 
pression produced by a greater intensity of light, are wanting, 
but, notwithstanding, the illusion is more perfect, and exer- 
cises a stronger effect on the imagination than is excited by 
the most perfect painting. Fancy associates with every plant 
the wonders of some distant region, as we listen to the rust- 
ling of the fan-like leaves, and see the changing and flitting 
effect of the light, when the tops of the palms, gently moved 
by currents of air, come in contact as they wave to and fro. 
So great is the charm produced by reality, although the rec- 
ollection of the artificial care bestowed on the plants certainly 
exercises a disturbing influence. Perfect development and 
freedom are inseparably connected with nature, and in the 
eyes of the zealous and botanical traveler, the dried plants of 
an herbarium, collected on the Cordilleras of South America 
or in the plains of India, are often more precious than the as- 
pect of the same species of plants within a European hot- 

* Wilh. von Humboldt, in his Briefwechsel mit Schiller, 1830, s. 470 



EASTERN GARDENS. 101 

house. Cultivation blots out some of the original characters 
of nature, and checks the free development of the several parts 
of the exotic organization. 

The physiognomy and arrangement of plants and their con- 
trasted apposition must not be regarded as mere objects of 
natural science, or incitements toward its cultivation ; for the 
attention devoted to the physiognomy of plants is likewise of 
the greatest importance with reference to the art of landscape 
gardening. I will not yield to the temptation here held out 
to me of entering more fully into this subject, merely limiting 
myself to a reference to the beginning of this section of the 
present work, where, as we found occasion to praise the more 
frequent manifestation of a profound sentiment of nature no- 
ticed among nations of Semitic, Indian, and Iranian descent, 
so also we find from history that the cultivation of parks orig- 
inated in Central and Southern Asia. Semiramis caused gar- 
dens to be laid out at the foot of the Mountain Bagistanos, 
which have been described by Diodorus,* and whose fame in- 
duced Alexander, on his progress from Kelone to the horse 
pastures of Nyssea, to deviate from the direct road. The 
parks of the Persian kings were adorned with cypresses, whose 
obelisk-like forms resembled the flame of fire, and were, on 
that account, after the appearance of Zerduscht (Zoroaster) 
first planted by Gushtasp around the sacred precincts of the 
Temple of Fire. It is thus that the form of the tree itself 
has led to the myth of the origin of the cypress in Paradise.f 

* Diodor., ii., 13. He, however, ascribes to the celebrated gardens of 
Semiramis a circumference of only twelve stadia. The district near the 
pass of Bagistanos is still called the " bow or circuit of the gardens" — 
Tauk-i-bostan (Droysen, Gesch. Alexanders des Grossen, 1833, s. 553). 

t In the Schahnameh of Firdusi it is said, ** a slender cypress, reared 
in Paradise, did Zei'dusht plant before the gate of the temple of fire" 
(at Kishmeer in Khorassan). " He had written on this tall cypress that 
Gushtasp had adopted the genuine faith, of which the slender tree was 
a testimony, and thus did God difiuse righteousness. When many years 
had passed away, the tall cypress spread and became so large that the 
hunter's cord could not gird its circumference. When its top was sur- 
rounded by many brancYies, he encompassed it with a palace of pure 

gold and caused it to be published abroad, Where is there on 

the earth a cypress like that of Kishmeer? From Paradise God sent 
it me, and said. Bow thyself from thence to Paradise." When the 
Calif Motewekkil caused the cypresses, sacred to the Magians, to be 
cut down, the age ascribed to this one was said to be 1450 years. See 
Vuller's Fragmente iiher die Religion des Zoroaster, 1831, s. 71 und 
114 ; and Ritter, Erdknnde, th. vi., i., s. 242. The original native place 
of the cypress (in Ai-abic arar, wood, in Persian serw kohi) appears to 
be the mountains of Busih, west of Hei'at {G6ographie d'Edrisi, trad 
par Jaubert, 1836, t. i., p. 464)" 



102 COSMOS. 

The gardens of the Asiatic terrestrial paradises (TrapaSeKJot.) 
excited the early admiration of the inhabitants of the West ;* 
and the worship of trees may be traced among the Iranians 
to the remote date of the prescripts of Horn, named, in the 
Zend-Avesta, the promulgator of the old law. We learn 
from Herodotus the delight taken by Xerxes in the great 
plane-tree in Lydia, on which he bestowed decorations of gold, 
appointing one of the "immortal ten thousand" as its special 
guard. t The ancient adoration of trees was connected, owing 
to the refreshing and humid shadow of the leafy canopy, with 
the worship of the sacred springs. 

To this consideration of the primitive worship of nature be- 
longs a notice of the fame attached among the Hellenic races 
to the remarkably large palm-tree in the island of Delos, and 
to an ancient palm-tree in Arcadia. The Buddhists of Cey- 
lon venerate the colossal Indian fig-tree, the Banyan of Anu- 
rahdepura, which is supposed to have sprung from the branches 
of the original tree under which Buddha, as the inhabitant 
of the ancient Magadha, fell into a state of beatitude, sponta- 
neous extinction, nirivcuta.X As separate trees became ob- 
jects of adoration from the beauty of their forms, so likewise 
groups of trees were venerated as groves of the gods. Pausa- 
nias speaks in high terms of admiration of a grove round the 
Temple of Apollo at Grynion u^olis,§ while the grove of Co- 
lonus is likewise celebrated in the famous chorus of Sophocles. 

* Achill. Tat, i., 25; Longus, Past., iv., p. 108; Schafer. "Gese- 
nius ( Thes. Lingua Hebr., t. ii., p. 1124) very justly advances the view 
that the word Paradise belonged originally to the ancient Persian lan- 
guage, but that its use has been lost in the modern Persian. Firdusi, 
although his ow^n name was taken from it, usually employs only the 
word behischt ; the ancient Persian origin of the word is, however, ex- 
pressly corroborated by Pollux, in the Onomast., ix., 3 ; and by Xeno- 
phon (CEr.on., 4, 13, and 21 ; Anab., i., 2, 7, and i., 4, 10; Cyrop., i., 
4, 5). In its signification of pleasure-garden, or garden, the word has 
probably passed from the Persian into the Hebrew (pardes, Cant.,iy., 
13; Nehem., ii., 8; and Eccl , ii., 5); into the Arabic {firdaus, plur. 
faradisu, compare Alcoran, 23, 11, and Luc, 23, 43); into the Syrian 
and Armenian {partes, see Ciakciak, Dizionario Armeno, 1837, p. 1194; 
and SchrSder, Thes. Ling. Armen., 1711, Praef., p. 56). The derivation 
of the Persian word from the Sanscrit {pradisa, or paradisa, circuit, or 
district, or foreign land), which was noticed by Benfey {Griech. Wur» 
zellexikon, bd. i., 1839, s. 138), and previously by Bohlen and Gesenius^ 
suits perfectly in form, but not so well in sense." — Buschmann. 

t Herod., vii., 31 (between Kallatebus and Sardes). 

X Ritter, Erdkunde, th. iv., 2, s. 237, 251, und 681 ; Lassen, Indisch* 
Alterthumshunde, bd. i., s. 260. 

§ PaTisanias, i., 21, 9. Compare, also. Arboretum Sacrum, in Meursii 
Op. ex rece»sione Joann. Lami, vol. x.j Florent., 1753, p. 777-844. 



CHINESE PARKS AND GARDENS. 103 

The feeling for nature manifested by the early cultivated 
East Asiatic nations, in the choice and the careful attention 
of sacred objects chosen from the vegetable kingdom, was most 
strongly and variously exhibited in their cultivation of parks. 
In the remotest parts of the Old Continent the Chinese gar- 
dens appear to have approached most nearly to what we are 
now accustomed to regard as English parks. Under the vic- 
torious dynasty of Han, gardens were so frequently extended 
over a circuit of many miles that agriculture was injured by 
them, and the people excited to revolt.* *' What is it that 
we seek in the possession of a pleasure garden ?" asks an an- 
cient Chinese writer, Lieu-tscheu. It has been universally 
admitted, throughout all ages, that plantations should com- 
pensate to man for the loss of those charms of which he is de- 
prived by his removal from a free communion with nature, 
his proper and most delightful place of abode. " The art of 
laying out gardens consists in an endeavor to combine cheer- 
fulness of aspect, luxuriance of growth, shade, solitude, and 
repose, in such a manner that the senses may be deluded by 
an imitation of rural nature. Diversity, which is the main 
advantage of free landscape, must therefore be sought in a 
judicious choice of soil, an alternation of chains of hills 
and valleys, gorges, brooks, and lakes covered with aquatic 
plants. Symmetry is wearying, and ennui and disgust will 
soon be excited in a garden where every part betrays con- 
straint and art."t The description given by Sir George 
Staunton of the great imperial garden of Zhe-hol,j: north of 
the Chinese wall, corresponds with these precepts of Lieu- 
tscheu — precepts to which our ingenious cotemporary, who 
formed the charming park of Muskau,^ will not refuse his ap- 
proval. 

In the great descriptive poem written in the middle of the 
last century by the Emperor Kien-long, in praise of the former 
Mantchou capital, Mukden, and of the graves of his ances- 
tors, the most ardent admiration is expressed for free nature, 
when but little embeUished by art. The poetic prince shows 
a happy power in fusing the cheerful images of the luxuriant 

* Notice Historique sur les Jardins des Chinois, in the Mimoires con» 
cernant Ics Chinois, t. viii., p. 309. 

t See the work last quoted, p. 318-320. 

t Sir George Staunton, Account of the Errihassy of the Earl of M% 
tartney to China, vol. ii., p. 245. 

^ Prince PUckler-Muskau, Andeutungen icber Landschaftsgdrtnerei, 
1834. Compare, also, his Picturesque Descriptions of the Old and New 
English Parks, as well as that of the Egyptian Gardens of Schubra. 



104 COSMOS. 

freshness of the meadows, of the forest-crowned hills, and the 
peaceful dwelling's of men, Avith the somber picture of the 
tombs of his forefathers. The sacrifices which he offers in 
obedience to the rites prescribed by Confucius, and the pious 
remembrance of the departed monarchs and warriors, Ibrm 
the principal objects of this remarkable poem. A long enu- 
meration of the wild plants and animals that are natives of 
the region is wearisome, like every other didactic work ; but 
the blending of the visible impressions produced by the land- 
scape, which serves, as it were, for the back-ground of the pic- 
ture, with the exalted objects of the ideal world, with the ful- 
fillment of religious duties, together with the mention of great 
historical events, gives a peculiar character to the whole com- 
position. The feeling of adoration for mountains, which was 
so deeply rooted among the Chinese, leads Kiendong to give a 
careful delineation of the physiognomy of inanimate nature, for 
which the Greeks and Romans evinced so little feeling. The 
form of the separate trees, the character of their ramification, 
the direction of the branches, and the form of the foliage, are 
all dwelt on with special predilection.* 

If I have not yielded to the distaste for Chinese literature, 
which is, unfortunately, disappearing too slowly from among 
us, and if I have dwelt too long on the consideration of the 
delineations of nature met with in the works of a cotemporary 
of Frederic the Great, I am so much the more bound to as- 
cend seven and a half centuries further back into the annals 
of time, in order to refer to the poem of the Garden, by See- 
ma-kuang, a celebrated statesman. The pleasure grounds de- 
scribed in this poem are certainly much crowde^ by buildings 
in the fashion of the old Italian villas, but the minister like- 
wise celebrates a hermitage, which is situated among rocks 
and surrounded by high fir-trees. He extols the open view 
over the broad river Kiang, crowded with vessels, and ex- 
pects, with contentment, the arrival of friends, who will read 
their verses to him, since they will also listen to his composi- 
tions. t See-ma-kuang wrote about the year 1086, when, in 
Germany, poetry was in the hands of a rude clergy, and was 
not even clothed in the garb of the national tongue. 

At this period, and probably five hundred years earlier, the 
inhabitants of China, of Eastern India, and Japan, were al- 

■* Eloge de la Ville de Mouhden, Poeme compose par I'EmpereuT 
Kien-long. traduit par le P. Amiot, 1770, p. 18, 22-25, 37, 63-68, 73-87 
104, and 120. 

+ M6moires concernant les Chinois, t. ii , p. 643-650. 



PHYSIOGNOMY OF NATURE. 105 

ready acquainted with a great variety of vegetable forms. 
The intimate connection which existed among the different 
Buddhist sacerdotal establishments contributed its influence 
in this respect. Temples, cloisters, and burying-places were 
surrounded by gardens, adorned with exotic trees, and covered 
by variegated flowers of different forms. Indian plants were 
early difiiised over China, Corea, and Nipon. Siebold, whose 
writings give a comprehensive view of all matters referring to 
Japan, was the first to draw attention to the cause of the mixt 
ure of the floras of remotely-separated Buddhist lands.* 

The rich abundance of characteristic vegetable forms pre- 
sented by the present age to scientific observation and to land- 
scape painting, must act as a powerful incentive to trace the 
sources which have yielded us this increased knowledge and 
enjoyment of nature. The enumeration of these sources must 
be reserved for the history of the contemplation of nature in 
the succeeding portion of this work. Here my object has been 
to depict, in the reflection of the external world on the mental 
activity and the feelings of mankind, those means which, in 
the progress of civilization, have exercised so marked and an- 
imated an influence on the study of nature. Notwithstand- 
ing a certain freedom of development of the several parts, the 
primitive force of organization binds all animal and vegetable 
forms to fixed and constantly-recurring types, determining, in 
every zone, the character that peculiarly appertains to it, or 
the physiognomy of nature. We may therefore regard it as 
one of the most precious fruits of European civilization, that 
it is almost every where permitted to man, by the cultivation 
and arrangement of exotic plants, by the charm of landscape 
painting, and by the inspired power of language, to procure a 
substitute for familiar scenes during the period of absence, or 
to receive a portion of that enjoyment from nature which is 
yielded by actual contemplation during long and not unfre- 
quently dangerous journeys through the interior of distant 
continents. 

* Ph. Fr. von Siebold, Kruidkundige Naamlijst van Japansche en Chi' 
neescke Planten, 1844, p. 4. What a diflference do we not find ou com 
paring the variety of vegetable forms cultivated for so many centuries 
past in Eastern Asia, v^rith those enumerated by Columella, in his mea 
ger poem De Cultu Hortarum (v. 95-105, 174-176, 225-271, 295-306), 
and to which the C(3lebrated garland-weavers of Athens were confined! 
It was not until the time of the Ptolemies that in Egypt, and especially 
in Alexandria, the more skillful gardeners appear to have devoted any 
great attention to variety, particularly for winter cultivation. (Com 
pare Athen., v., p. 196.) 

E 2 



106 COSMOS. 



PART II. 

HISTORY OF THE PHYSICAL CONTEMPLATION OF THE UNIVERSE.— 
PRINCIPAL CAUSES OF THE GRADUAL DEVELOPMENT AND EXTEN- 
SION OF THE IDEA OF THE COSMOS AS A NATURAL UNITY. 

The history of the physical contemplation of the universe 
is the history of the recognition of the unity of nature, the rep- 
resentation of the effort^ made by man to comprehend the 
combined action of natural forces on the earth and in the re- 
gions of space, and hence it designates the epochs of advance- 
ment in the generalization of views, being a portion of the 
history of our world of thought, in as far as it refers to objects 
manifested by the senses, to the form of conglomerated mat- 
ter, and the forces inherent in it. 

In the section of the first portion of this work, relating to 
the limitation and scientific treatment of a physical description 
of the universe, I hope I may have succeeded in developing 
with clearness the relation existing between the separate nat- 
ural sciences and the description of the universe (the science 
of the Cosmos), and the manner in which this science simply 
draws from these various branches of study the materials for 
its scientific foundation. The history of the knowledge of the 
universe, of which I here present the leading ideas, and which 
for the sake of brevity, I name either simply the history of tha 
Cosmos, or the history of the physical contemjylation of the uni- 
verse, must not, therefore, be confounded with the history of 
the natural sciences, as given in many of our leading element- 
ary w^orks on physics and physiology, or on the morphology 
of plants and animals. 

In order to give some idea of what has been collected at 
eeparate epochs under this point of view, it appears most de- 
sirable to adduce separate instances illustrative of the subjects 
which must either be treated of or discarded in the succeed- 
ing portions of this work. The discoveries of the compound 
microscope, of the telescope, and of colored polarization, belong 
to the history of the Cosmos, since they have afforded the 
means of discovering that which is common to all organisms ; 
of penetrating into the remotest regions of space ; of distin- 
guishing between reflected or borrowed light, and the light of 
Bclf-luminous bodies, or, in other words, determining whethei 



PHYSICAL CONTEMPLATION OF IHE UNIVERSE. 107 

fiolar light be radiated from a solid mass or from a gaseoua 
envelope. The enumeration of the experiments which, since 
Huygens's time, have gradually led to Arago's discovery ot 
colored polarization, must be reserved for the history of optics. 
The consideration of the development of the principles, in ac- 
cordance with which variously-formed plants admit of being 
classified in families, falls, in like manner, within the domain 
of the history of phytognosy, or botany ; while the geography 
of plants, or a study of the local and climatic distribution of 
vegetation over the whole earth — alike over the solid portions 
and in the basins of the sea — constitutes an important section 
in the history of the physical contemplation of the universe. 

The intellectual consideration of that which has led man 
to an insight into the unity of nature is, as we have already 
observed, as little entitled to the appellation of the complete 
history of the cultivation of mankind as to that of a history 
of the natural sciences. An insight into the connection of 
the vital forces of the universe must certainly be regarded as 
the noblest fruit of human civilization, and as the tendency to 
arrive at the highest point to which the most perfect develop- 
ment of the intellect can attain ; but the subject at present 
under consideration must still constitute only a part of the 
history of human civilization, embracing all that has been 
attained by the advance of different nations in the pursuit of 
every branch of jnental and moral culture. By assuming a 
more limited physical point of view, we necessarily become 
restricted to one section of the history of human knowledge, 
and our attention is specially directed to the relation existing 
between the knowledge that has been gradually acquired and 
the whole extent of the domain of nature ; and we dwell less 
on the extension of separate branches of science than on the 
results capable of generalization, and the material aids con- 
tributed by different ages toward a more accurate observation 
of nature. 

We must, above all, distinguish carefully between an early 
presentiment of knowledge and knowledge itself. With the 
increasing cultivation of the human race, much has passed 
from the former to the latter, and by this transition the his- 
tory of discovery has been rendered indistinct. An intellect- 
ual and ideal combination of the facts already established often 
guides almost imperceptibly the course of presage, elevating it 
as by a power of inspiration. How much has been enounced 
among the Indians and Greeks, and during the Middle Ages, 
regarding the connection of natural phenomena, which, at first 



108 COSMOS. 

either vague, or blended with the most Tinfounaed h}TDotheses, 
has, at a subsequent epoch, been confirmed by sure experience, 
and then been recognized as a scientific truth I The preseii- 
tient fancy and the vivid activity of spirit which animated 
Plato, Columbus, and Kepler, must not be disregarded, as if 
they had effected nothing in the domain of science, or as if 
they tended, of necessity, to draw the mind from the investi- 
gation of the actual. 

As we have defined the history of the physical contempla- 
tion of the universe to be the history of the recognition of 
nature in the unity of its phenomena, and of the connection 
of the forces of the universe, our mode of proceeding must 
consist in the enumeration of those subjects by which the idea 
of the unity of the phenomena has been gradually developed. 
We would here distinguish : 

1. The independent efforts of reason to acquire a knowledge 
of natural laws, by a meditative consideration of the phenom- 
ena of nature. 

2. Events in the history of the world which have suddenly 
enlarged the horizon of observation. 

3. The discovery of new means of sensuous perception, as 
well as the discovery of new organs by which men have been 
brought into closer connection, both with terrestrial objects 
and with remote regions of space. 

This three-fold view serves as a guide in defining the prin 
cipal epochs that characterize the history of the science of the 
Cosmos. For the purpose of further illustration, I would 
again adduce some examples indicative of the diversity of the 
means by which mankind attained to the intellectual posses- 
sion of a great portion of the universe. Under this head I 
include examples of an enlarged field of natural knowledge, 
great historical events, and the discovery of new organs. 

The knowledge of nature, as it existed among the Hellenic 
nations under the most ancient forms of physics, was derived 
more from the depth of mental contemplation than from the* 
sensuous consideration of phenomena. Thus the natural phi- 
losophy of the Ionian physiologists was directed to the funda- 
mental ground of origin, and to the metamorphoses of one sole 
element, while the mathematical symbolicism of the Pythago- 
reans, and their consideration of numbers and forms, disclose 
a philosophy of measure and harmony. The Doric-Italian 
school, by its constant search for numerical elements, and by 
a certain predilection for the numerical relations of space and 
time, laid the foundation, as it were, of the subsequent de&gt;e/- 



PHYSICAL CONTEMPLATION OF THE UNIVERSE. 109 

opment of our experimental sciences. The history of the con- 
templation of the universe, as I interpret its limits, designates 
not so much the frequently-recurring oscillations between truth 
and error, as the principal epochs of the gradual approxima- 
tion to more accurate views regarding terrestrial forces and 
the planetary system. It shows us that the Pythagoreans, 
according to the report of Philolaiis of Croton, taught the pro- 
gressive movement of the non-rotating Earth, its revolution 
round the focus of the world (the central fire, hestia), while 
Plato and Aristotle imagined that the Earth neither rotated 
nor advanced in space, but that, fix^d to one central point, it 
merely oscillated from side to side. Hicetas of Syracuse, who 
must, at least, have preceded Theophrastus, Heraclides Ponti- 
cus, and Ecphantus, all appear to have had a knowledge of the 
rotation of the Earth on its axis ; but Aristarchus of Samos, 
and more particularly Seleucus of Babylon, who lived one 
hundred and fifty years after Alexander, first arrived at the 
knowledge that the Earth not only rotated on its own axis, 
but also moved round the Sun as the center of the whole plan- 
etary system. And if, in the dark period of the Middle Ages, 
Christian fanaticism, and the lingering influence of the Ptol- 
emaic school, revived a belief in the immobility of the Earth, 
and if, in the hypothesis of the Alexandrian, Cosmas Indico- 
pleustes, the globe again assumed the form of the disk of 
Thales, it must not be forgotten that a German cardinal, 
Nicholas de Cuss, was the first who had the courage and the 
independence of mind again to ascribe to our planet, almost 
a hundred years before Copernicus, both rotation on its axis 
and translation in space. After Copernicus, the doctrines of 
Tycho Brahe gave a retrograde movement to science, although 
this was only of short duration ; and when once a large mass 
of accurate observations had been collected, to which Tycho 
Brahe himself contributed largely, a correct view of the struc- 
ture of the universe could not fail to be speedily established. 
We have already shown how a period of fluctuations between 
truth and error is especially one of presentiments and fanciful 
hypotheses regarding natural philosophy. 

After treating of the extended knowledge of nature as a si- 
multaneous consequence of direct observations and ideal com- 
binations, we have proceeded to the consideration of those his- 
torical events which have materially extended the horizon of 
the physical contemplation of the universe. To these belong 
migrations of races, voyages of discovery, and military expe- 
ditions. Events of this nature have been the means of ao 



110 COSMOS. 

quiring a knowledge of the natural character oi* the Earth*a 
surface (as, for instance, the configuration of continents, the 
direction of mountain chains, and the relative height of ele- 
vated plateaux), and in the case of extended tracts of land, of 
presenting us with materials for expounding the general laws 
of nature. It is unnecessary, in this historical sketch, to give 
a connected tissue of events, and it will be sufficient, in the 
history of the recognition of nature as a whole, to refer mere- 
ly to those events which, at early periods, have exercised a 
decided influence on the mental efforts of mankind, and on a 
more extended view of the universe. Considered in this light, 
the navigation of Colaeus of Samos beyond the Pillars of Her- 
cules ; the expedition of Alexander to Western India ; the 
dominion exercised by th^ Romans over the then discovered 
portions of the world ; the extension of Arabian cultivation, 
and the discovery of the New Continent, must all be regarded 
as events of the greatest importance for the nations settled 
round the basin of the Mediterranean. My object is not so 
much to dwell on the relation of events that may have occur- 
red, as to refer to the action exercised on the development of 
the idea of the Cosmos by events, whether it be a voyage of 
discovery, the establishment of the predominance of some 
highly-developed language rich in literary productions, or tlje 
sudden extension of the knowledge of the Indo- African mon- 
soons. 

As I have already incidentally mentioned the influence of 
language in my enumeration of heterogeneous inducements, 1 
will draw attention generally to its immeasurable importance 
in two wholly different directions. Languages, when extens- 
ively diffused, act individually as means of communication 
between widely-separated nations, and collectively when sev- 
eral are compared together, and their initernal structure and 
degrees of affinity are investigated, as means of promoting a 
more profound study of the history of mankind. The Greek 
language, which is so intimately connected with the national 
life of the Hellenic races, has exercised a magic power over 
all the foreign nations with which these races came in con- 
tact.* The Greek language appears in the interior of Asia, 
through the influence of the Bactrian empire, as a conveyer 
of knowledge, which, a thousand years afterward, was brought 

* Niehalar, Rom. Geschichle, th.i.fS. 69; Drojsen, Gesch.der Bildung 
des Hellenistischen Staatensystems, 1843, s. 31-34, 567-573 ; Fried. 
Cramer, De Studiis qu(B veteres ad aliarum Gentium contulerint Lingnaa, 
1844. p. 2-13. 



PHYSICAL CONTEMPLATION OF THE UNIVERSE. Ill 

back by the Arabs to the extreme west of Europe, blended 
with hypotheses of Indian origin. The ancient Indian and 
Malayan tongues furthered the advance of commerce and the 
intercourse of nations in the island- world of the southwest of 
Asia, in Madagascar, and on the eastern shores of Africa ; and 
it is also probable that tidings of the Indian commercial sta- 
tions of the Banians may have given rise to the adventurous 
expedition of Vasco de Gama. The predominance of certain 
languages, although it unfortunately prepared a rapid destruc- 
tion for the idioms displaced, has operated favorably, like 
Christianity and Buddhism, in bringing together and uniting 
mankind. 

Languages compared together, and considered as objects of 
the natural history of the mind, and when separated into fam- 
ilies accordmg to the analogies existing in their internal struc- 
ture, have become a rich source of historical knowledge ; and 
this is probably one of the most brilliant results of modern 
study in the last sixty or seventy years. From the very fact 
of their being products of the intellectual force of mankind, 
they lead us, by means of the elements of their organism, into 
an obscure distance, unreached by traditionary records. The 
comparative study of languages shows us that races now sep- 
arated by vast tracts of land are allied together, and have mi- 
grated from one common primitive seat ; it indicates the course 
and direction of all migrations, and, in tracing the leading 
epochs of development, recognizes, by means of the more or 
less changed structure of the language, in the permanence of 
certain forms, or in the more or less advanced destruction of 
the formative system, which race has retained most nearly 
the language common to all who had migrated from the gen- 
eral seat of origin. The largest field for such investigations 
into the ancient condition of language, and, consequently, into 
the period when the whole family of mankind was, in the strict 
sense of the word, to be regarded as one living whole, presents 
itself in the long chain of Indo-Germanic languages, extending 
from the Ganges to the Iberian extremity of Europe, and from 
Sicily to the North Cape. The same comparative study of 
languages leads us also to the native country of certain prod- 
ucts, which, from the earliest ages, have constituted important 
objects of trade and barter. The Sanscrit names of genuine 
Indian products, as those of rice, cotton, spikenard, and sugar, 
have, as we find, passed into the language of the Greeks, and, 
to a certain extent, even into those of Semitic origin.* 

* In Sanscrit, rice is ^rihi, cotton karpdsa, sugar ^sarkare, and spiko* 



112 COSMOS 

From tlie above considerations, and the examples by wh?:ch 
they have been illustrated, the comparative study of languagei 
appears as an important rational means of assistance, by which 
scientific and genuinely philological investigations may lead to 
a generalization of views regarding the affinity of races, and 
their conjectural extension in various directions from one com- 
mon point of radiation. The rational aids toward the gradual 
development of the science of the Cosmos are, therefore, of 
very different kinds, viz., investigations into the structure of 
languages ; the deciphering of ancient inscriptions and histor- 
ical monuments in hieroglyphics and arrow-headed writing ; 
the greater perfection of mathematics, especially of that pow- 
erful analytic calculus by which the form of the earth, the ebb 
and flow of the sea, and the regions of space are brought within 
the compass of calculation. To these aids must be further 
added the material inventions wdiich have procured for us, as 
it were, new organs, sharpened the power of our senses, and 
enabled men to enter into a closer communication with terres- 
trial forces, and even with the remote regions of space. In 
order tc enumerate only a few of the instruments whose in- 
vention characterizes great epochs in the history of civilization, 
I would name the telescope, and its too long-delayed connec- 
tion with instruments of measurement ; the compound micro- 
Bcope, which furnishes us with the means of tracing the con- 
ditions of the process of development of organisms, which 
Aristotle gracefully designates as " the formative activity, the 
source of being ;" the compass, and the different contrivances 
invented for measuring terrestrial magnetism ; the use of the 

nard, nanartlia. See Lassen, Indische Altertlnimskunde, bd. i., 1843, s. 
245, 250, 270, 289, und 538. On ^sarkara and kanda (whence oui- sugar 
candy), consult my Prolegomena de Distrihutione Geographicd Planta- 
rum, 1817, p. 211. " Confudisse videntur veteres saccharum verum 
cum Tebaschiro Bambuspe, cum quia utraque in arundinibus inveniun- 
tur, turn etiam quia vox Sanscradana scharkara, quae hodie (ut Pers, 
schakar et Hindost. schukur) pro saccharo nostro adhibetur, observante 
Boppio, ex auctoritate Amarasinhte, proprie nil dulce (madu) eignificat, 
sed quicquid lapidosum et arenaceum est, ac vel calculura vesicae. 
Verisimile igitur, vocem scharkara initio dumtaxat tebaschirum (saccar 
nornbii) indicasse, postei'ius in saccharum iiostrum humilioris arundinis 
(tkschu, kandekschu, kanda), ex similitudine aspectus translatara esse. 
Vox Bambusae ex mamhu derivatur ; ex kanda nostratium voces candis 
zuckerkand. In tebaschiro agnoscitur Persarum schir, h. e. lac. Sanscr. 
kschiram." The Sanscrit name for tabaschir is tvakkschird, bark-milk; 
milk from the bark. See Lassen, bd. i., s. 271-274. Compare, also, 
Pott, Kurdische Studien in the Zeitschrift fur die Kunde des Morgen- 
landes, bd. vii., s. 163-166, and the masterly treatise by Carl Ritter, in 
nis Erdkunde von Asien, bd. vi., 2, s. 232-237. 



PHYSICAL CONTEMPLATICN OF THE UNI7ERSE. 113 

pendulum as a measure of time ; the barometer ; the ther- 
mometer ; hygrometric and electrometric apparatuses ; and 
the polariscope, in its application to the phenomena of colored 
polarization, in the light of the stars, or in luminous regions 
of the atmosphere. 

Tlie history of the physical contemplation of the universe, 
which is based, as we nave already remarked, on a meditative 
consideration of natural phenomena, on the connection of great 
events, and on inventions which enlarge the domain of sens- 
uous perception, can only be presented in a fragmentary and 
superficial manner, and only in its leading features. I flatter 
myself with the hope that the brevity of this mode of treat- 
ment will enable the reader the more readily to apprehend the 
spirit in which a picture should be sketched, whose limits it is 
so difficult to define. Here, as in the picture of nature which 
is given in the former part of this work, it will be my object 
to treat the subject, not with the completeness of an individ- 
ualizing enumeration, but merely by the development of lead- 
ing ideas, that indicate some of the paths which must be pur- 
sued by the physicist in his historical investigations. The 
knowledge of the connection of events and their causal rela- 
tions is assum.ed to be possessed by the reader, and it will con- 
sequently be sufficient merely to indicate these events, and de- 
termine the influence which they have exercised on the grad- 
ual increase of the knowledge of nature as a whole. Com- 
pleteness, I must again repeat, is neither to be attained, nor 
is it to be regarded as the object of such an undertaking. In 
the announcement of the mode in which I propose treating 
my subject, in order to preserve for the present work its pe- 
culiar character, I shall, no doubt, expose myself again to the 
animadversionsof those who think less of what a book contains 
than of that which, according to their individual views, ought 
to be found in it. I have purposely been much more circum- 
stantial with reference to the more ancient than the modern 
portions of history. Where the sources of information are 
less copious, the difficulty of a proper combination is increased, 
and the opinions advanced then require to be supported by the 
testimony of facts less generally known. I would also observe 
that I have permitted myself to treat my subject with ine- 
quality, where the enumeration of individual fa cts aflbrded the 
advantage of imparting greater interest to the narrative. 

As the recognition of the unity of the Cosmos began in an 
intuitive presentiment, and with merely a few actual observa- 
tions on isolated portions of the domain of nature, it seems in* 



114 COSMOS 

cimiTjent that we should begin our historical representation ol 
the universe Irom some definite point of our terrestrial planet. 
We will select for this purpose that sea basin around which 
have dwelt those nations whose knowledge has formed the 
basis of our western civilization, which alone has made an 
almost uninterrupted progress. We may indicate the main 
streams from which Western Europe has received the elements 
of the cultivation and extended views of nature, but amid the 
diversity of these streams we are unable to trace one primitive 
source. A deep insight into the forces of nature and a recog- 
nition of the unity of the Cosmos does not appertain to a so- 
called primitive race : a term that has been applied, amid 
the alternations of historical views, sometimes to a Semitic 
race in Northern Chaldea — Arpaxad (the Arrapachitis of 
Ptolemy)* — and sometimes to a race of Indians and Iranians, 
in the ancient Zend, in the district surrounding the sources 
of the Oxus and the Jaxartes.t History, as far as it is based 
on human testimony, knows of no primitive race, no one prim- 
itive seat of civilization, and no primitive physical natural 
science whose glory has been dimmed by the destructive bar- 
barism of later ages. The historical inquirer must penetrate 
through many superimposed misty strata of symbolical myths 
before he can reach that solid foundation where the earliest 
germ of human culture has been developed in accordance 
with natural laws. In the dimness of antiquity, which con- 
stitutes, as it were, the extreme horizon of true historical 
knowledge, we see many luminous points, or centers of civili- 
zation, simultaneously blending their rays. Among these we 
may reckon Egypt at least five thousand years before our 
era.4 Babylon, Nineveh, Kashmir, Iran, and also China, after 

* Ewald, Geschi'chte des Volkes Israel, bd. i., 1843, s. 332-334 ; Lassen, 
Ind. Alterthumskunde, bd. i., s. 528. Compare Rodiger, in the Zeit- 
schrift fur die Kunde des Morgenlandes, bd. iii., s. 4, on Chaldeans and 
Kurds, the latter of whom Strabo terms Kyrti. 

t Bordj, the water-shed of the Ormuzd, nearly where the chain of the 
Thian-schan (or Celestial Mountains), at its western termination, abuts 
in veins against the Bolor (Belur-tagh), or rather intersects it, under the 
name of the Asferah chain, north of the highland of Pamer (Upa-M6ru, 
or countiy above Meru). Compare Burnouf, Commentaire sur le Yagna, 
t. i., p. 239, and Addit., p. clxxxv., with Humboldt, Asie Centrale, t. i., 
p. 163 ; t. ii., p. 16, 377-390. 

X The principal chronological data for Egypt are as follows : " Menes, 
3?'00 B.C. at least, and probably tolerably correct; 3430, commence- 
ment of the fourth dynasty, which included the pyramid builders, Che- 
phren-Schafra, Cheops-Chufu, and Mykerinos or Menkera ; 2200, inva- 
fiion of the Hyksos under the twelfth dynasty, to which belongs Ame- 
oemha III., thg builder of the original Labyrinth. A thousand years, 



fllYSICAL CONTEMPLATION OF THE UNIVERSE. 115 

the first colony migrated from the northeastern declivity of 
the Kuen-lun into the lower river valley of the Hoang-ho. 

at least, and probably still more, must be conjectured for the gradual 
growth of a civilization which had been completed, and had in part 
begun to degenerate, at least 3430 years B.C." (Lepsius, in several 
letters to myself, dated March, 1846, and therefore after his return from 
his memorable expedition.) Compare, also, Bunsen's Considerationt 
on the Commencement of Universal History, which, strictly defined, is 
only a history of recent times., in his ingenious and learned work, 
JEgyptens Stelle in der Weltgeschichte, 1845, erstes Buch, s. 11-13. 
The historical existence and regular chronology of the Chinese go back 
to 2400, and even to 2700 before our era, far beyond Ju to Hoang-ty. 
Many literary monuments of the thirteenth century B.C. are extant, 
and in the twelfth century B.C. Thscheu-li records the measurement 
of the length of the. solstitial shadow taken with such exactness by 
Tscheu-kung, in the town of Lo-yang, south of the Yellow River, that 
Laplace found that it accorded perfectly with the theory of the altera- 
tion of the obliquity of the ecliptic, which was only established at the 
close of the last century. All suspicion of a measurement of the Earth's 
direction derived by calculating back, falls therefore to the ground of 
itself See Edouard Biot, Sur la Constitution Politique de la Chine au 
12eme Siecle avant notre ere (1845), p. 3 and 9. The building of Tyre 
and of the original temple of Melkarth (the Tyrian Hercules) would, 
according to the account which Herodotus received from the priests 
(H., 44), reach back 2760 years before our era. Compare, also, Hee- 
reu, Ideen uber Politik und Verkehr der Vdlker, th. i., 2, 1824, s. 12. 
Simplicius calculates, from a notice transmitted by Porphyry, that the 
date of the earliest Babylonian astronomical observations which were 
known to Aristotle was 1903 years before Alexander the Great; and 
Ideler, who is so profound and cautious as a chronologist, considers this 
estimate in no way improbable. See his Handbuch der Chronologie, 
bd. i., 8. 207 ; the Abha?idlungen der Berliner Akad. auf das Jahr 1814, s. 
217 ; and B6ckh, Metrol. Untersuchungen ilber die Masse des Alterthnms, 
1838, s. 36. Whether safe historic ground is to be found in India earlier 
than 1200 B.C., according to the chronicles of Kashmeer (Radjataran- 
gini, trad, par Troyer), is a question still involved in obscurity ; while 
Megasthenes (Indica, ed. Schwanbeck, 1846, p. 50) reckons for 153 
kings of the dynasty of Magadha, from Manu to Kandragupta, from 
sixty to sixty-four centuries, and the astronomer Aryabhatta places the 
begmning of his chronology 3102 B.C. (Lassen, Ind. Alterthumsk., bd. 
i., s. 473-505, 507, und 510). In order to give the numbers contained 
in this note a higher significance in respect to the history of human 
civilization, it will not be superfluous to recall the fact that the destmc- 
tion of Troy is placed by the Greeks 1184, by Homer 1000 or 950, and 
by Cadmus the Milesian, the first historical writer among the Greeks, 
524 years before our era. This comparison of epochs proves at what 
ditferent periods the desire for an exact record of events and enter- 
prises was awakened among the nations most highly susceptible of cul- 
ture and we are involuntarily reminded of the exclamation which 
Plato, in the Timceus, puts in the mouth of the priests of Sais : " O So- 
lon, O Solon ! ye Greeks still remain ever children ; nowhere in Hellaa 
is there an aged man. Your souls are ever youthful ; ye have in them 
no knov^ ledge of antiquity, no ancient belief, no wisdom grown vener- 
»ble by age." 



116 COSMOS. 

These central points ivoluntarily remind us of the hirgest 
among the sparkling stars of the firmament, these eternal suns 
in the regions of space, the intensity of whose brightness we 
certainly know, although it is only in the case of a few that 
we have been able to arrive at any certain knowledge regard- 
ing the relative distances which separate them from our planet. 

The hypothesis regarding the physical knowledge supposed 
to have been revealed to the primitive races of men — the nat- 
ural philosophy ascribed to savage nations, and since obscured 
by civilization — belongs to a sphere of science, or; rather, of be- 
lief, which is foreign to the object of the present work. We 
find this belief deeply rooted in the most ancient Indian doc- 
trine of Krischna.=^ " Truth was originally implanted in man- 
kind, but, having been suffered gradually to slumber, it was 
finally forgotten, knowledge returning to us since that period 
as a recollection." We will not attempt to decide the ques- 
tion whether the races, which we at present term savage, are 
all in a condition of original wildness, or whether, as the struc- 
ture of their languages often allows of our conjecturing, many 
among them may not be tribes that have degenerated into a 
wild state, remaining as the scattered fragments saved from 
the wreck of a civilization that was early lost. A more inti- 
mate acquaintance with these so-called children of nature 
reveals no traces of that superiority of knowledge regarding 
terrestrial forces which a love of the marvelous has led men 
to ascribe to these rude nations. A vague and terror-stricken 
feeling of the unity of natural forces is no doubt awakened in 
the breast of the savage, but such a feeling has nothing in 
common with the attempt to prove, by the power of thought, 
the connection that exists among all phenomena. True cos- 
mical views are the result of observation and ideal combina- 
tion, and of a long-continued communion with the external 
world ; nor are they a work of a single people, but the fruits 
yielded by reciprocal communication, and by a great, if not 
general, intercourse between different nations. 

As, in the considerations on the reflection of the external 
world on the powers of the imagination at the beginning of 
this section of the present work, I selected from the general 
history of literature examples illustrative of the expression of 
an animated feeling for nature, so, in the history of the con- 
temjjLation of the universe, I would likewise bring forward 
from the general history of civilization whatever may serve to 

* Wilheloi vou Humboldt, Uehcr eine Episode des Maha-Bharata, in 
his Gesammelte Werke, bd. i., s. 73. 



PHYSICAL CONTEMPLATION OF THE UNIVERSE. 117 

indicate the progress that has been made toward the recogni- 
tion of the unity of nature. Both portions — not separated ar- 
bitrarily, but by determined principles — have the same rela- 
tions to one another as the studies from which they have been 
borrowed. The history of the civilization of mankind com- 
prises in itself the history of the fundamental powers of the 
human mind, and also, therefore, of the works in which these 
powers have been variously displayed in the different depart- 
ments of literature and art. In a similar manner, we recog- 
nize in the depth and animation of the sentiment of love for 
nature, which we have delineated according to its various 
manifestations at different epochs and among different races 
of men, active means of inducement toward a more careful 
observation of phenomena, and a more earnest investigation 
of their cosmical connection. 

Owing to the diversity of the streams which have in the 
course of ages so unequally diffused the elements of a more 
extended knowledge of nature over the whole earth, it will be 
most expedient, as we have already observed, to start in the 
history of the contemplation of the external world from a sin- 
gle group of nations, and for this object I select the one from 
which our present scientific cultivation, and, indeed, that of 
the whole of Western Europe, has originated. The mental 
cultivation of the Greeks and Romans must certainly be re- 
garded as very recent in comparison with that of the Egyp- 
tians, Chinese, and Indians ; but all that the Greeks and Ro- 
mans received from the east and south, blended with what 
they themselves produced and developed, has been uninter- 
ruptedly propagated on our European soil, notwithstanding 
the continual alternation of historical events, and the admix- 
ture of foreign immigrating races. In those regions in which 
a much greater degree of knowledge existed thousands of years 
earlier, a destructive barbarism has either wholly darkened 
the pre-existing enlightenment, or, where a stable and complex 
system of government has been preserved, together with a 
maintenance of ancient customs, as is the case in China, ad- 
vancement in science or the industrial arts has been very in 
considerable, while, the almost total absence of a free inter- 
course with the rest of the world has interposed an insuperable 
barrier to the generalization of views. The cultivated nations 
of Europe, and their descendants who have been transplanted 
to other continents, may be said, by the gigantic extension 
of their maritime expeditions to the remotest seas, to be fa- 
miliarized with the most distant shores ; and those countries 



118 COSMOS. 

which they do not already possess, they may threaten. In 
the almost uninterrupted course of the knowledge transmitted 
to them, and in their ancient scientific nomenclature, we may 
trace, as the guiding points of the history of the human race, 
recollections of the various channels through which important 
inventions, or, at any rate, their germs, have been conveyed 
to the nations of Europe ; thus from Eastern Asia has flowed 
the knowledge of the direction and declination of a freely-sus- 
pended magnetic rod ; from Phoenicia and Egypt the knowl- 
edge of chemical preparations, as glass, animal and vegetable 
dyes, and metallic oxyds ; and from India the general use of 
position in determining the increased values of a few numer- 
ical signs. 

Since civilization has left its most ancient seat within the 
tropics or the sub-tropical zone, it has remained permanently 
settled in the portion of the earth whose northern regions are 
less cold than those of Asia and America under the same lati- 
tude. The continent of Europe may be regarded as a western 
peninsula of Asia, and I have already observed how much 
general civilization is favored by the mildness of its climate, 
and how much it owes to the circumstances of its variously 
articulated form, first noticed by Strabo ; to its position in re- 
spect to Africa, which extends so far into the equatorial zone, 
and to the prevalence of the west winds, which are warm 
winds in winter, owing to their passing over the surface of the 
ocean. The physical character of Europe has opposed fewer 
obstacles to the difliision of civilization than are presented in 
Asia and Africa, where far-extending parallel ranges of mount- 
ain chains, elevated plateaux, and sandy deserts interpose al- 
most impassable barriers between different nations. 

We will therefore start in our enumeration of the principal 
momenta that characterize the history of the physical consid- 
eration of the universe from a portion of the earth which is, 
perhaps, more highly favored than any other, owing to its 
geographical position, and its constant intercourse with other 
countries, by means of which the cosmical views of nations 
experience so marked a degree of enlargement. 



PHYSICAL CONTEMPLATION OP THE UNIVERSE. 119 



PRINCIPAL MOMENTA THAT HAVE INFLUENCED THE HIS 
TORY OF THE PHYSICAL CONTEMPLATION OF THE UNI- 
VERSE. 

THE MEDITERRANEAN CONSIDERED AS THE STARTING-POINT FOR 
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE RELATIONS WHICH HAVE LAID THE 
FOUNDATION OF THE GRADUAL EXTENSION OF THE IDEA OF THE 
COSMOS.— SUCCESSION OF THIS RELATION TO THE EARLIEST CUL- 
TIVATION AMONG HELLENIC NATIONS. — ATTEMPTS AT DISTANT 
MARITIME NAVIGATION TOWARD THE NORTHEAST (BY THE ARGO- 
NAUTS) ; TOWARD THE SOUTH (TO OPHIR) ; TOWARD THE WEST 
(BY COLiEUS OF SAMOS). 

Plato, in his Fhcedo, describes the narrow limits of the 
Mediterranean in a manner that accords with the spirit of en- 
larged cosmical view^s.* " We, who inhabit the region extend- 
ing from Phasis to the Pillars of Hercules, occupy only a small 
portion of the earth," he writes, •** where we have settled our- 
selves round the inner sea like ants or frogs round a swamp." 
This narrow basin, on the borders of which Egyptian, PhoB- 
nician, and Hellenic nations flourished and attained to a high 
degree of civilization, is the point from which the most im- 
portant historical events have proceeded, no less than the col- 
onization of vast territories in Africa and Asia, and those 
maritime expeditions which have led to the discovery of the 
whole western hemisphere of the globe. 

The Mediterranean shows in its present configuration the 
traces of an carHer subdivision into three contiguous smaller 
closed basins. t 

The JEgean is bounded to the south by the curved line 
formed by the Carian coast of Asia Minor, and the islands of 
Rhodes, Crete, and Cerigo, and terminating at the Pelopou' 

* Plato, Phcedo, p. 109, B. (Compare Herod., ii., 21.) Cleomedes 
supposed that the surface of the earth was depressed in the middle, in 
order to receive the Meditenanean (Voss, Crit. Blatter, bd. ii., 1828, 
8. 144 mid 150). 

t I first developed this idea in my Rel. Hist, du Voyage aux Region* 
Equinoxiales, t. iii., p. 236, and in the Examen Crit. de VHist. de la 
G6ogr. au 15eme Siecle, t. i., p. 36-38. See, also, Otfried MtiUer, in 
the Gottingische gelehrte Anzeigen, 1838, bd. i., s. 376. The most west- 
ern basin, which I name generally the Tyrrhenian, includes, according 
to Strabo, the Iberian, Ligurian, and Sardinian Seas. The Syrtic basin, 
east of Sicily, includes the Ausonian or Siculian, the Libyan, and the 
Ionian Seas. The southern and southwestern part of the JEgean Sea 
was called Cretic, Saronic, and Myrtoic. The remarkable passage in 
Aristot., De Mundo, cap. iii. (p. 393, Bekk.), refers only to the bay-like 
configuration of the coasts of the Mediterranean, and its effect on tha 
ocean flowing into it. 



120 COSMOS. 

nesus, not far from the Promontory of Malea, Further west- 
ward is the Ionian Sea., the Syrtic basin, in which hes Malta. 
The western extremity of Sicily here approaches within forty- 
eight geographical miles of the coast of Africa. The sudden 
appearance and short continuance of the upheaved volcanic 
island of Ferdinandea in 1831, to the southwest of the calca- 
reous rocks of Sciacca, seem to indicate an effort of nature to 
reclose the Syrtic basin between Cape Grantola, Adventure 
Bank, examined by Captain Smyth, Pantellaria, and the Af- 
rican Cape Bon, and thus to divide it from the third western 
basin, the Tyrrhenian. This last sea receives the ocean 
which enters the Pillars of Hercules from the west, and sur- 
rounds Sardinia, the Balearic Islands, and the small volcanic 
group of the Spanish Columbratae. 

This triple constriction of the Mediterranean has exercised 
a great influence on the earliest limitations, and the subse- 
quent extension of Phoenician and Greek voyages of discovery. 
The latter were long limited to the ^Egean and Syrtic Seas. 
In the Homeric times the continent of Italy was still an "un- 
known land." The Phocieans ojiened the Tyrrhenian basin 
west of Sicily, and Tartessian mariners reached the Pillars 
of Hercules. It must not be forgotten that Carthage was 
founded at the boundary of the Tyrrhenian and Syrtic basins. 
The physical configuration of the coast-line influenced the 
course of events, the direction of nautical undertakings, and 
the changes in the dominion of the sea ; and the latter reacted 
again on the enlargement of the sphere of ideas. 

The northern shore of the Mediterranean possesses the ad- 
vantage of being more richly and variously articulated than 
the southern or Libyan shore, and this was, according to 
Strabo, noticed already by Eratosthenes.* Here we find 
three peninsulas, the Iberian, the Italian, and the Hellenic, 
which, owing to their various and deeply-indented contour, 
form, together with the neighboring islands and the opposite 

* Humboldt, Asie Centrale, t. i., p. 67. The two remarkable pas- 
sages of Strabo are as follows : " Eratosthenes enumerates three, and 
Polybius five points of laud in which Europe terminates. The first- 
mentioned of these writers names the projecting point which extends 
to the Pillars of Hercules, on which Iberia is situated ; next, that which 
terminates at the Sicilian Straits, to which Italy belongs ; and, thirdly, 
that which extends to Malea, and comprises all the nations between 
the Adriatic, the Euxine, and the Tanais" (lib. ii., p. 109). " We be- 
^in with Europe because it is of irregular form, and is the quarter most 
tavorable to the mental and social ennoblement of men. It is habitable 
in all parts except some districts near the Tauais, which are not peopled 
on account of the cold" (lib. ii., p 126). 



PHYSICAL CONTEMPLATION OF THE UNIVERSE. 121 

coasts, many straits and isthmuses. Such a configuration of 
continents and of islands that have been partly severed and 
partly upheaved by volcanic agency in rows or in far project- 
ing fissures, early led to geognostic views regarding eruptions, 
terrestrial revolutions, and outpourings of the swollen higher 
Beas into those below them. The Euxine, the Dardanelles, 
the Straits of Gades, and the Mediterranean, with its numer- 
ous islands, were well fitted to draw attention to such a sys- 
tem of sluices. The Orphic Argonaut, who probably lived in 
Christian times, has interwoven old mythical narrations in his 
composition. He sings of the division of the ancient Lyktonia 
into separate islands, " when the dark-haired Poseidon, in an- 
ger with Father Kronion, struck Lyktonia with the golden 
trident." Similar fancies, which may often certainly have 
sprung from an imperfect knowledge of geographical relations, 
were frequently elaborated in the erudite Alexandrian school, 
which was so partial to every thing connected with antiquity. 
Whether the myth of the breaking up of Atlantis be a vague 
and western reflection of that of Lyktonia, as I have else- 
where shown to be probable, or whether, according to Otfried 
Miiller, " the destruction of Lyktonia (Leukoma) refers to the 
Samothracian legend of a great flood which changed the form 
of that district,"* is a question that it is unnecessary here to 
decide. 

* Ukert, Geogr. der Grlechen und Romer, th. i., abth. 2, s. 345-348, 
and th. ii.,abth. 1, 8. 194; Johannes v. Miiller, Werke, bd. i., s. 38 ; Hum- 
boldt, Examen Critique, t. i., p. 112 and 171; Otfried Miiller, Minyer, 
8. 64 ; and the latter, again, in a too favorable critique of my memoir 
on the Mythische Geographie der Griechen {Gott. gelehrte Anzeigen, 
1838). I expressed myself as follows: "In raising questions which 
are of so great importance with respect to philological studies, I can 
not wholly pass over all mention of that which belongs less to the de- 
scription of the actual world than to the cycle of mythical geography. 
It is the same with space as with time. History can not be treated 
from a philosophical point of view, if the heroic ages be wholly lost 
sight of. National myt^is, when blended with history and geography, 
can not be regarded as appertaining wholly to the domain of the ideal 
world. Although vagueness is one of its distinctive attributes, and sym- 
bols cover reality by a more or less thick vail, myths, when intimately 
connected together, nevertheless reveal the ancient source from which 
the earliest glimpses of cosmography and physical science have been 
derived. The facts recorded in primitive history and geography are 
not mere ingenious fables, but rather the reflection of the opinion gen- 
erally admitted regarding the actual world." The great investigator 
of antiquity (whose opinion is so favorable to me, and whose early 
death in the land of Greece, on which he had bestowed such profound 
and varied research, has been universally lamented) considered, on the 
contrary, that " the chief part of the poetic idea of the earth, as it oc- 
VoL. II.— F 



122 cosMog. 

But that which, as has already been frequently rem^irked, 
has rendered the geographical position of the Mediterranean 
most beneficial in its influence on the intercourse of nations, 
is the proximity of the eastern continent, where it projects 
into the peninsula of Asia Minor ; the number of islands in 
the JEgean Sea, which have served as a means for facilitating 
the spread of civilization ;=* and the fissure between Arabia, 
Egypt, and Abyssinia, through which the great Indian Ocean 
penetrates under the name oi the Arabian Gulf or the Red 
Sea, and which is separated by a narrow isthmus from the 
Delta of the Nile and the southeastern coasts of the Mediter- 
ranean. By means of all these geographical relations, the in- 
fluence of the sea as a connecting element was speedily man- 
ifested in the growing power of the Phcenicians, and subse- 
quently in that of the Hellenic nations, and in the rapid ex- 
tension of the sphere of general ideas. Civilization, in its 
early seats in Egypt, on the Euphrates, and the Tigris, in 
Indian Pentapotaraia and China, had been limited to lands 
rich in navigable rivers ; the case was different, however, in 
Phoenicia and Hellas. The active life of the Greeks, espe- 
cially of the Ionian race, and their early predilection for mar- 
itime expeditions, found a rich field for its development in the 
remarkable configuration of the Mediterranean, and in its rel- 
ative position to the oceans situated to the south and west. 

curs in Greek poetry, is by no means to be ascribed to actual experi 
ence, which may have been invested, from credulity and love of the 
marvelous, with a fabulous character, as has been conjectured especial- 
ly with respect to the Phoenician maritime legends, but rather that it 
was to be traced to the roots of the images which lie in certain ideal 
presuppositions and requirements of the feelings, on which a true geo- 
graphical knowledge has only gradually begun to work. From this fact 
there has often resulted the interesting phenomenon that purely sub- 
jective creations of a fancy guided by certain ideas become almost im- 
perceptibly blended with actual countries and well-known objects of 
scientific geography. From these considerations, it may be inferred 
that all genuine or artificially mythical picture^ of the imagination be- 
long, in their proper ground-work, to an ideal world, and have no orig- 
inal connection with the actual extension of the knowledge of the earth, 
or of navigation beyond the Pillars of Hercules." The opinion ex- 
pressed by me in the French work agreed more fully with the earlier 
views of Otfried Mttller, for, in the Prolegomenon zu einer wissenschaft 
lichen Mythologie, s. 68 und 109, he said very distinctly that, " in myth- 
ical narratives of that which is done and that which is imagined, the 
real and the ideal are most closely connected together." See, also, on 
the Atlantis and Lyktonia, Martin, Etudes sur le Timie de Platon, t. i.. 
p. 293-326. 

* Naxos, by Ernst Curtius, 1846, s. 11; Droysen, Oesckichte der Bil 
dung des Hellenistischen Staafentystems, 1843, s. 4-9. 



PHYSICAL CONTEMPLATION OF THE UNIVERSE. 123 

'^e existence of the Arabian Gulf as the result of the ir- 
h-x^^ tion of the Indian Ocean through the Straits of Bab-el- 
Mandeb belongs to a series of great physical phenomena, 
which could alone have been revealed to us by modern geog- 
nosy. The European continent has its main axis directed 
from northeast to southwest ; but almost at right angles to 
this direction there is a system of fissures, which have given 
occasion partly to a penetration of sea-water, and partly to 
the elevation of parallel mountain chains. This inverse line 
cf strike, directed from the southeast to the northwest, is dis- 
cernible from the Indian Ocean to the efflux of the Elbe in 
Northern Germany ; in the Red Sea, the southern part of 
which is inclosed on both sides by volcanic rocks ; in the Per- 
sian Gulf, with the deep valleys of the double streams of the 
Euphrates and the Tigris ; in the Zagros chain in Luristan ; 
in thii mountain chains of Hellas, and in the neighboring isl- 
ands of the Archipelago ; and, lastly, in the Adriatic Sea, 
and the Dalmatian calcareous Alps. The intersection* of 
these two systems of geodetic lines directed from N.E. to S. W., 
and from S.E. to N.W. (the latter of which I consider to be 
the more recent of the two), and whose cause must undoubt- 
edly be traced to disturbances in the interior of our planet, has 
exercised the most important influence on the destiny of man- 
kind, and in facilitating intercourse among different nations 
This relative position, and the unequal degrees of heat experi- 
enced by Eastern Africa, Arabia, and the peninsula of West- 
ern India at different periods of the year, occasion a regular 
alternation of currents of air (monsoons), favoring navigation 
to the Myrrhifera Regio of the Adramites in Southern Arabia, 
to the Persian Gulf, India, and Ceylon ; for, at the season of 
the year (from April and May to October) when north winds 
are prevailing in the Red Sea, the southwest monsoon is 
blowing from Eastern Africa to the coast of Malabar, while 
the northeast monsoon (from October to April), which favors 
the return passage, corresponds with the period of the south 
winds between the Straits of Bab-el-Mandeb and the Isthmus 
of Suez. 

After having sketched that portion of the earth to which 
foreign elements of civilization and geographical knowledge 
might have been conveyed to the Greeks from so many different 
directions, we will first turn to the consideration of those na- 
tions inhabiting the coasts of the Mediterranean who enjoyed 

* Leopold von Buch, Ueber die Geognostischen Systeme von Deuttcht 
land, 8 xi.; Humboldt, Asie Centrale, t. i., p. 284-286. 



IS4 COSMOS 

an early and distinguished degree of civilization, viz., the 
Egyptians, the Pha3uicians, with their north and west African 
colonies, and the Etrurians. Immigration and commercial 
intercourse have here exercised the most powerful influence. 
The more our historical horizon has been extended in modern, 
times by the discovery of monuments and inscriptions, as well 
as by philosophical investigation of languages, the more varied 
does the influence appear which the Greeks in the earliest 
ages experienced from Lycia and the district surrounding the 
Euphrates, and from the Phrygians allied to Thracian races. 
In the Valley of the Nile, which plays so conspicuous a part 
in the history of mankind, " there are well-authenticated car- 
touches of the kings as far back as the beginning of the fourth 
dynasty of Manetho, in which are included the builders of the 
Pyramids of Giseh (Chephren or Schafra, Cheops-Chufu, and 
Menkera or Mencheres)." I here avail myself of the account 
of the most recent investigations of Lepsius,* whose expedi- 
tion has resulted in throwing much important light on the 
whole of antiquity. " The dynasty of Manetho began more 
than thirty-four centuries before our Christian era, and twenty- 
three centuries before the Doric immigration of the Heraclidae 
into the Feloponnesus.t The great stone pyramids of Daschur, 
somewhat to the south of Giseh and Sakara, are considered by 
Lepsius to be the work of the third dynasty. Sculptural in- 
scriptions have been discovered on the blocks of which they 
are composed, but as yet no names of kings. The last dynasty 
of the ancient kingdom, which terminated at the. invasion of 
the Hyksos, and probably 1200 years before Homer, was the 
twelfth of Manetho, and the one to which belonged Ame- 
nemha III., the prince who caused the original- labyrinth to 
be constructed, and who formed Lake Moeris artificially by 
means of excavations and large dikes of earth running north 
and west. After the expulsion of the Hyksos, the new king- 
dom began under the eighteenth dynasty (4600 years B.C.). 
Rameses Miaraoun the Great (Rameses II.) was the second 
ruler of the nineteenth dynasty. The sculptured delineations 
which perpetuate his victories were explained to Germanicus 

All that relates to Egyptian chronology and history, and which is 
distinguished in the text by marks of quotation, is based on manuscript 
communications which I received from my friend Professor Lepsius, 
in March, 1846. 

t I place the Doric immigration into the Peloponnesus 328 years 
before the first Olympiad, agreeing in this respect with Otfried MUUer 
(Darier, abth. ii., s. 436). 



PHYSICAL UONl «:MPLATI0N OF THE UNIVERSE. 125 

By the priests of Thebes * He is noticed by Herodotus under 
the name of Sesostris, which is probably owing to a confusion 
with the almost equally victorious and powerful conqueror 
Seti (Setos), who was the father of Rameses II." 

I have deemed it necessary to mention these few points of 
chronology, in order that where we meet with solid historical 
ground, we may pause to determine the relative ages of greiit 
events in Egypt, Phoenicia, and Greece, As I have already 
briefly described the geographical relations of the Mediterra- 
nean, I would now also call attention to the number of cen- 
turies that intervened between the epoch of human civilization 
in the Valley of the Nile and its subsequent transmission to 
Greece ; for, without such simultaneous reference to space and 
time, it would be impossible, from the nature of our mental 
faculties, to form to ourselves any clear and satisfactory pict- 
ure of history. 

Civilization, which was early awakened and arbitrarily 
modeled in the Valley of the Nile, owing to the mental re- 
quirements of the people, the peculiar . physical character of 
the country, and its hierarchical and political institutions, ex- 
cited there, as in every other portion of the earth, an impulse 
toward increased intercourse with other nations, and a tend- 
ency to undertake distant expeditions and establish colonies. 
But the records preserved to us by history and monumental 
representations testify only to transitory conquests on land, and 
to few extensive voyages of the Egyptians themselves. This 
anciently and highly civilized race appears to have exercised 
a less permanent influence on foreigners than many other 
smaller nations less stationary in their habits. The national 
cultivation of the Egyptians, which, from the long course of 
its development, was more favorable to masses than to indi- 
viduals, appears isolated in space, and has, on that account, 
probably remained devoid of any beneficial result for the ex- 
tension of cosmical views. Rameses Miamoun (who lived from 
1388 to 1322 B.C., and therefore 600 years before the first 
Olympiad of Corcebus) urdertook distant expeditions, having, 
according to the testimony of Herodotus, penetrated into Ethi- 
opia (where Lepsius believed that he found his most southern 
architectural works at Mount Barkal) through Palestinian 
Syria, and crossed from Asia Minor to Europe, through the 

* Tac, Annul., ii., 59. In the Papyrus of Sallier {Campagnes d» 
Sisoatris) Champollion found the names of the Javani or louui. and 
that of the Luki (lonians and Lycians ?). See Bunsen, ^gypten, buck 
i., 8. 60. 



126 COSMOS. 

lands of the Scythians and Thracians, to Colchis Djid the 
River Phasis, where those of his soldiers who were weary of 
their wanderings remained as settlers. Rameses was also the 
first, according to the priests, " who, by means of his long ships, 
subjected to his dominion the people who inhabited the coasts 
of the Erythrean Sea. After this achievement, he continued 
his course until he came to a sea which was not navigable, 
owing to its shallowness."* Diodorus expressly says that Se- 
Bostris (Rameses the Great) penetrated into India beyond the 
Ganges, and that he brought captives back with him from 
Babylon. " The only certain fact with reference to Egyptian 
navigation is, that, from the earliest ages, not only the Nile, 
but the Arabian Gulf, was navigated. The celebrated cop- 
per mines near Wadi-Magaha, on the peninsula of Sinai, were 
worked as early as the fourth dynasty, under Cheops-Chufu. 
Tha sculptural inscriptions of Hamamat on the Cosseir road, 
which connected the Valley of the Nile with the western 
coasts of the Red Sea, go back as far as the sixth dynasty. 
Attempts were made under Rameses the Greatf to form the 

* Herod., ii., 102 and 103 ; Diod. Sic, i., 55 aud 56. Of the memo- 
rial pillars (^OTTj'kaL) which Rameses Miamoun set up as tokens of victoiy 
in the countries through which he passed, Herodotus expressly names 
three (ii., 106): ''one in Palestinian Syria, and two in Ionia, on the 
road from the Ephesian territory to Phocaaa, and from Sardis to Smyr- 
na." A rock inscription, in which the name of Rameses is frequently 
met with, has been found near the Lycus in Syria, not far from Beirut 
(Berytus), as well as another ruder one in the Valley of Karabel, near 
Nymphio, and, according to Lepsius, on the road from the Ephesian 
territory to Phocjea. Lepsius, in the Ann. delV Institute ArckeoL, vol. 
X., 1838, p. 12; and in his letter from Smyrna, Dec, 1845, published 
in the Archaologische Zeitung, Mai, 1846, No. 41, s. 271-280. Kiepert, 
in the same periodical, 1843, No. 3, s. 35. Whether, as Heeren be- 
lieves (see in his Geschichte der Staaten des Alterthnms, 1828, s. 76), 
the great conqueror penetrated as far as Persia and Western India, " as 
Western Asia did not then contain any great empire" (the building of 
Assyrian Nineveh is placed only 1230 B.C.), is a question that will un- 
doubtedly soon be settled from the rapidly advancing discoveries now 
made in archfeology and phonetic languages. Strabo (lib. xvi., p. 760) 
speaks of a memorial pillar of Sesostris near the Strait of Deire, now 
known as Bab-el-Mandeb. It is, moreover, also very probable, that 
even in " the Old Kingdom," above 900 years before Rameses Miamoun, 
Egyptian kings may have undertaken similar military expeditions into 
Asia. It was under Seios II., the Pharaoh belonging to the nineteenth 
dynasty, and the s(jcond successor of the great Rameses Miamoun, that 
Moses went out of Egypt, and this, according to the researches of Lep* 
sius, was about 13 JO years before our era. 

t According to Aristotle, Strabo, and Pliny, but not according to 
Herodotus. See Letronne, in the Rivue des deitx Mondes, 1841, t. 
xxvii., p. 219 ; and Droysen, Bildung des Hellenist. Staalensy stems, s. 735. 



PHYSICAL CONTEMPIiATION OF THE UNIVERSE. 127 

canal from Suez, probably for the purpose of facilitating in* 
tercourse with the land of the Arabian copper mines." More 
considerable maritime expeditions, as, for instance, the fre- 
quently contested, but not, I think, improbable* circumnavi- 
gation of Africa under Neku II. (611-595 B.C.), were con- 
fided to Phoenician vessels. About the same period or a little 
earlier, under Neku's father, Psammitich (Psemetek), and 
somewhat later, after the termination of the civil war under 
Amasis (Aahmes), Greek mercenaries, by their settlement at 
Naucratia, laid the foundation of a permanent foreign com- 
merce, and by the admission of new elements, opened the way 
for the gradual penetration of Hellenism into Lower Egypt. 
Thus was introduced a germ of mental freedom and of greater 
independence of local influences — a germ which was rapidly 

* To the impoi'taut opinions of Rennell, Heeren, and Sprengel, who 
are inclined to believe in the reality of the circumnavigation of Libya, 
we must now add that of a most profound philologist, Etienne Quatre- 
mere {M^moires de V Acad, des Inscriptions, t. xv., Part ii., 1845, p. 380- 
388). The most convincing argument for the truth of the report of 
Herodotus (iv., 42^ appears to me to be the observation which seems 
to him so incredible, viz., " that the mariners who sailed round Libya 
(from east to west) had the sun on their right hand." In the Mediter- 
ranean, in sailing from east to west, from Tyre to Gadeira, the sun at 
noon was seen to the left only. A knowledge of the possibility of such 
a navigation must have existed in Egypt previous to the time of Neku 
II. (Nechos), as Herodotus makes him distinctly command the Phoeni- 
cians " to return to Egypt through the passage of the Pillars of Her- 
cules." It is singular that Strabo, who (lib. ii., p. 98) discusses at such 
length the attempted circumnavigation of Eudoxus of Cyzicus under 
Cleopatra, and mentions fragments of a ship from Gadeira which were 
found on the Ethiopian (eastern) shore, considers the accounts given of 
the circumnavigations actually accomplished as Bergaic fables (lib. ii., 
p. 100) ; but he does not deny the possibility of the circumnavigation 
itself (lib. i,, p. 38), and declares that from the east to the west there 
is but little that remains to its completion (lib. i., p. 4). Strabo by no 
means agreed to the extraordinary isthmus hypothesis of Hipparchus 
and Marinus of Tyre, according to which Eastern Africa is joined to 
the southeast end of Asia, and the Indian Ocean converted into a Med- 
iterranean Sea. (Humboldt, Examen Crit. de VHist. de la G6ogra' 
phie, t. i., p. 139-142, 145, 161, and 229; t. ii., p. 370-373). Strabo 
quotes Herodotus, but does not name Nechos, whose expedition he 
confounds with one sent by Darius round Southern Persia and Arabia 
(Herod., iv., 44). Gosselin even proposed, somewhat too boldly, to 
change the reading from Darius to Nechos. A counterpart for the 
horse's head of the ship of Gadeira, which Eudoxus is said to have ex- 
hibited in a market-place in Egypt, occurs in the remains of a ship of 
the Red Sea, which was' brought to the coast of Crete by westerly cur- 
rents, according to the account of a very tinistworthy Arabian historian 
(Masudi, in the Morudj-al-dzeheb, Quatrem^re, p. 389, and Reinaud, 
Relation des Voyages dans V Rde, 1845, t. i., p. xvi., andt. ii,, p. 46). 



128 COSMOS. 

and powerfully developed during the per.od of the new cos* 
mical views that succeeded the Macedonian conquest. The 
opening of the Egyptian ports under Psammitich is an event 
of very great importance, as the country up to that period, at 
least at its northern extremity, had for a long time been com- 
pletely closed to strangers, as Japan is at the present day.* 

In our enumeration of the non-Hellenic civilized nations 
who dwelt around the basin of the Mediterranean — the most 
ancient seat and the starting point of our mental cultivation — 
we must rank the Phoenicians next to the Egyptians. This 
race is to be regarded as the most active in maintaining inter- 
course between the nations from the Indian Ocean to the west 
and north of the Old Continent. Although circumscribed in 
many spheres of mental cultivation, and less familiar with the 
fine arts than with mechanics, and not endowed with the grand 
form of creative genius common to the more highly-gifted in 
habitants of the Valley of the Nile, the Phoenicians, as an ad- 
venturous and conmiercial race, and especially by the estab- 
lishment of colonies (one of which far surpassed the parent 
city in political power), exerted an influence on the course of 
ideas, and on the diversity and number of cosmical views, 
earlier than all the other nations inhabiting the coasts of the 
Mediterranean. The Phoenicians, made use of Babylonian 
weights and measures,! and, at least since the Persian domin- 
ion, employed stamped metallic coinage as a monetary curren- 
cy, which, strangely enough, was not known in the artificial- 
ly-arranged political institutions of the highly-cultivated Egyp- 
tians. But that by which the Phoenicians contributed most 
powerfully to the civilization of the nations with which they 
came in contact was the general spread of alphabetical writ- 
ing, which they had themselves employed for a long period 
Although the whole mythical relation of the colony of Cadmus 
in Boeotia remains buried in obscurity, it is not the less certain 
that the Hellenes obtained the alphabetical characters long 
known as Phoenician symbols by means of the commercial in- 

* Diod., lib. i., cap. 67, 10; Herod., ii., 154, 178, and 182. On the 
probability of the existence of intercourse between Egypt and Greece, 
before the time of Psammetichus, see the ingenious observations of 
Ludwig Ross, in Hellenika, where he expresses himself as foLows, bd. 
i., 1846. s. V. and x. "In the times immediately preceding Psammeti- 
chus, there was in both countries a period of internal disturbance, which 
must necessarily have brought about a diminution and partial interrup 
tion of intercourse." 

t Bockh, Meterologische Tint ersucTiun gen uher Gewichte, MunzfiisH 
und Masse des AHerthums in ihrem Zusammenhang, 1838, s. 12 uud 273 



PHYSICAL CONTEMPLATION OP THE UNIVERSE. 129 

tercourse subsisting between the lonians and the Phoenicians.^ 
According to the views which, since ChampoUicn's great dis- 
covery, have been generally adopted regarding the earlier con- 
dition of the development of alphabetical writing, the Phcerii- 
cian as well as the Semitic characters are to be regarded as a 
phonetic alphabet, that has originated from pictorial writing, 
and as one in which the ideal signification of the symbols is 
wholly disregarded, and the characters are considered as mere 
signs of sounds. Such a phonetic alphabet was, from its very 
nature and fundamental character, syllabic, and perfectly able 
to satisfy all requirements of a graphical representation of 
the phonetic system of a language. *' As the Semitic written 
characters," says Lepsius, in his treatise on alphabets, " pass- 
ed into Europe to Indo-Germanic nations, who showed through- 
out a much stronger tendency to define strictly between vowela 
and consonants, and were by that means led to ascribe a high- 
er significance to the vowels in their languages, important an^ 
lasting modifications were effected in these syllabic alphabets. "1 
The endeavor to do away with syllabic characters was very 
strikingly manifested among the Greeks. The transmission 
of PhcEuician signs not only facilitated commercial intercourse 
among the races inhabiting almost all the coasts of the Med- 
iterranean, and even the northwest- coast of Africa, by form- 
ing a bond of union that embraced many civilized nations, 
but these alphabetical characters, when generalized by their 
graphical flexibility, were destined to be attended by even 
higher results. They became the means of conveying, as an 
imperishable treasure, to the latest posterity, those noble fruits 
developed by the Hellenic races in the differenc departments 
of the intellect, the feelings, and the inquiring and creative 
faculties of the imagination. 

The share taken by the Phoenicians in increasing the ele- 
ments of cosmical contemplation was not, however, limited 
to the excitement of indirect inducements, for they widened 
the domain of knowledge in several directions by independent 
inventions of their own. A state of industrial prosperity, based 
on an extensive maritime commerce, and on the enterprise 
manifested at Sidon in the manufacture of white and colored 

* See the passages collected in Otfried MuUer's Minyer, s. 115, and 
in his Dorier, abth. i., s. 129 ; Franz, Elementa Epigraphices GrcBcce^ 
1840, p. 13, 32, and 34. 

t Lepsius, in his memoir, Ueber die. Anordnung und Veruandtschaft 
des Semitischen, Indischen, Alt-Persischen, Alt'^gypiischen und JEthich 
piachen Alphabets, 1836, s. 23, 28. und 57; Gesenius, ^c^iptwrai Vka 
nicicB Monumenfa, 1837 p. 17. 

F2 



130 COSMOS. 

glass-wares, tissues, and purple dyes, necessarily led to ad' 
vancemeiit in mathematical and chemical knowledge, and 
more particularly in the technical arts. " The Sidonians," 
writes Strabo, " are described as industrious inquirers in as- 
tronomy, as well as in the science of numbers, to which they 
have been led by their skill in arithmetical calculation, and 
in navigating their vessels by night, both of which are indis- 
pensable to commerce and maritime intercourse."^ In order 
to give some idea of the extent of the globe opened by the 
navigation and caravan trade of the Phcenicians, we will 
mention the colonies in the Euxine, on the Bithynian shore 
(Pronectus and Bithynium), which were probably settled at a 
very early age ; the Cyclades, and several islands of the JEgean 
Sea, first known at the time of the Homeric bard ; the south 
of Spain, rich in silver (Tartessus and Gades) ; the north of 
Africa, west of the Lesser Syrtis (Utica, Hadrumetum, and 
Carthage) ; the tin and amber lands of the north of Europe ;t 

* Strabo, lib. xvi., p. 757. 

t The locality of the " land of tin" (Britain and the Scilly Islands) is 
more easily determined than that of the " amber coast ;" for it appears 
very improbable that the old Greek denomination Kaffatrspoc, which 
was already in use in the Homeric times, is to be derived from a 
mountain in the southwest of Spain, called Mount Cassius, celebrated 
for its tin ore, and which Avienus, who was well acquainted with the 
country, placed between Gaddir and the mouth of a small southern 
Iberus (Ukert, Geogr. der Griechen vnd Romer, theil ii., abth. i., s. 479). 
Kassiteros is the ancient Indian Sanscrit word kastira. Dan in Ice- 
Jandic ; zinn in German ; tin in English and Danish ; and tenn in Swed- 
ish, are rendered, in the Malay and Javanese language, by timah ; a 
similarity of sound which calls to mind that of the old German word gles- 
sum (the name applied to transparent amber), with the modern German 
glas, glass. The names of wares and articles of commerce pass from 
oue nation to another, and into the most different families of languages. 
Through the intercourse which the Phoenicians maintained with the 
eastern coast of India, by means of their factories in the Persian Gulf, 
the Sanscrit word kastira, which expressed so useful a product of 
Further India, and still exists among the old Arameeic idioms in the 
Arabian word kasdir, may have become known to the Greeks even 
before Albion and the British Cassiterides had been visited (Aug. Willi. 
V. Schlegel, in the Indische Bibliothek, bd. ii., s. 393 ; Benfey, Indien, 
s. 307; Pott, Etymol. Forschungen, th. ii., s. 414 ; Lassen, Indische Al 
terthumskunde, bd. i., s. 239). A name often becomes a historical mon- 
ument, and the etymological analysis of languages, however it may be 
derided, is attended by valuable results. The ancients were also ac- 
quainted with the existence of tin — one of the larest metals — in the 
country of the Artabri and the Callaici, in the northwest part of the 
^berian continent (Strabo, lib. iii., p. 147 ; Plin., xxxiv., c. 16), which 
was nearer of access than the Cassiterides (CEstiymnides of Avienus), 
from the Mediterranean. When, before embarking for the Canaries, 
I was in Galicia in 1799, mining operations, although of very inferior 



rHYSICAL CONTEMPLATION OF THE UNIVEIISE. 131 

a^J two commercial factories in the Persian Gulf* (the Ba* 
harian islands, Tylos and Aradus). 

The amber trade, which was probably directed first to the 
west Cimbrian shores,t and subsequently to the land of the 

nature, were still carried on in the granitic mountains (see my Rel. Hist., 
t. i., p. 51 and 53). The occurrence of tin is of some geognostic im- 
portance, on account of the former connection of Galicia, the peninsula 
of Brittany, and Cornwall. 

* Etienue Quatremere, op. cit., p. 363-370. 

t The opinion eai'ly expressed (see Heinzen's Neue Kielisches Maga- 
zin, th. ii., 1787, s. 339; Sprengel, Gesch. der Geogr. Enldeckungen, 
1792, s. 51; Voss, Krit. Blatter, bd. ii., s. 392-403) that amber was 
brought by sea at first only from the west Cimbrian coast, and that it 
reached the Mediterranean chiefly by land, being brought across the in 
tervening countries by means of inland barter, contiimes to gain in va- 
lidity. The most thorough and acute investigation of this subject ia 
contained in Ukert's memoir Ueber das Electrum, in Die Zeitschrift fur 
Alterthumswissenschaft, Jalir 1838, No. 52-55, s. 425-452. (Compare 
with it the same author's Geographic der Griechen und Romer, th. ii., 
abth. 2, 1832, s. 25-36; th. iii., i., 1843, s. 86, 175, 182, 320, und 349.) 
The Massiliaus, who, under Pytheas, advanced, according to Heereu, 
after the Phoenicians, as far as the Baltic, hardly penetrated beyond tha 
mouths of the Weser and the Elbe. Pliny (iv., 16) placed the amber 
islands (Glessaria, also called Austrania) decidedly west of the Cim- 
brian promontory, in the German Sea; and the connection with the ex 
pedition of Germanicus sufficiently teaches us tliat the island signified 
is not in the Baltic. The great eliect of the ebb and Hood tides in the 
estuaries which throw up amber, where, according to the expression of 
Servius, " mare vicissim tum accedit, tum recedit," applies to the coasts 
between the Helder and the Cimbrian Peninsula, but not to the Baltic, 
in which the island of Baltia is placed by Timaeus (Plin., xxxvii., 2). 
Abalus, a day's journey from an sestuarium, can not, therefore, be the 
Kurish Nehrung. See, also, on the voyage of Pytheas to the west shores 
of Jutland, and on the amber trade along the whole coast of Skage as 
far as the Netherlands, WerlautF, Bidrag til den Nordiske Ravhandela 
Historic (Kopenh., 1835). In Tacitus, and not in Pliny, we find the 
first acquaintance with the glessum of the shores of the Baltic, in the 
land of the ^Estui (iEstuorum gentium) and of the Venedi, concerning 
whom the great philologist ShatFarik {Slawische Alterthumer, th. i., s. 
151-165) is uncertain whether they were Slaves or Germani. The 
moi-e active direct connection with the Samland coast of the Baltic, and 
with the Bsthonians, by means of the over-land route through Pannouia, 
by Carnuntum, which was first followed by a Roman knight under Nero, 
appears to me to have belonged to the later times of the Roman Caesars 
(Voigt, Gesch. Freussen's, bd. i., s. 85). The relations between the 
Prussian coasts and the Greek colonies on the Black Sea are proved 
by fine coins, struck probably before the eighty-fifth Olympiad, which 
have been recently found in the Netz district (Lewezow, in the Ab- 
handl. der Berl. Akad. der Wiss. aus dem Jahr 1833, s. 181-224). The 
electron, the sun-stone of the very ancient mythus of the Eridanus (Plin.. 
xxxvii., cap. 2), the amber stranded or buried on the coast, was, no doubt, 
frequently brought to the south, both by land and by sea, from very 
different districts. The " amber which was found buried at two placet 



132 COSMOS. 

iEstii on the Baltic, owed its origin to the daring perseverance 
of Phoenician coasting traders. Its subsequent extension af- 
fords a remarkable example in the history of the contempla- 
tion of the universe, of the influence which may be exercised 
on the establishment of international intercourse, and on the 
extension of the knowledge of large tracts of land, by a predi- 
lection for even a single product. In the same manner as the 
Phocsean Massilians conveyed British tin through the whole 
extent of Gaul to the shores of the Hhone, amber passed from 
people to people through Germany and the territory of the 
Celts, on both sides of the Alps, to the Padus, and through 
Pannonia to the Borysthenes. This inland trade thus first 
connected the inhabitants of the coasts of the North Sea with 
those living on the shores of the Adriatic and the Euxine. 

The PhoBnicians of Carthage, . and probably those inhabit- 
ing the cities of Tartessus and Gades, which had been colon- 
ized two hundred years earlier, visited a considerable portion 
of the northwest coast of Africa, even beyond Cape Bojador, 
although the Chretes of Hanno is neither' the Chremetes of 
the Meteorologica of Aristotle, nor yet our Gambia.* Here 
were situated the numerous Tyrian cities, whose numbers were 
estimated by Strabo at 300, which were destroyed by Pharu- 
sians and Nigritians. Among these was Cerne (Dicuil's Gau- 
lea according to Letronne), the principal station for ships, as 
well as the chief emporium of the colonies on the coast. The 
Canary Islands and the Azores (which latter were regarded 
by Don Fernando, the son of Columbus, as the Cassiterides 

in Scythia was, in part, very dark colored." Amber is still collected 
near Kaltschedansk, not far from Kamensk, on the Ural ; and we have 
obtained at Katharinenburg fragments imbedded in lignite. See G. 
Rose, Reise nack dem Ural, bd. i., s. 481; and Sir Roderic Murchison, 
in the Geology of Russia, vol. i., p. 366. The petrified wood which 
frequently surrounds the amber had early attracted the attention of the 
ancients. This resin, which was, at that time, regarded as so precious 
a product, was ascribed either to the black poplar (according to the 
Chian Scymniis, v. 396, p. 367, Letronne), or to a tree of the cedar or 
pine genus (according to Mithridates, in Plin., xxxvii., cap. 2 and 3). 
The recent admirable investigations of Prof. Goppert, at Breslau, have 
shown that the conjecture of the Roman collector was the more correct. 
Respecting the petrified amber-tree (Pinites succifer) belonging to an 
extinct vegetation, see Berendt, Organische Reste im Bernstein, bd. i., 
abth. 1, 1845, s. 89. 

* On the ChremeteS, see Aristot., Meteor., lib. i., p. 350 (Bekk.); and 
on the most southern points of which Hanno makes mention in his 
ship's journal, see my Rel. Hist., t. i., p. 172; and Examen Crit. de la 
Qiog., t. i., p. 39, 180, and 288 ; t. iii., p. 135. Gosselin. Recherches sur 
la G6og System, des Anciens, t. i., p. 94 and 98 ; Ukert, th. i. 1 s. 61-66 



PHYSICAL CONIEMPLATION OF THE UNIVERSE. 133 

discovered by the Carthaginians), and the Orkneys, Faroe Isl- 
ands, and Iceland, became the respective western and north- 
ern intermediate stations for passing to the New Continent 
They indicate the two directions by which the European por- 
tion of the human race first became acquainted with the na- 
tives of North and Central America. This consideration give# 
a great, and, I might almost say, a cosmical importance to the 
question whether and how early the Phoenicians of the mother 
country, or those of the Iberian and African settlements (Ga- 
deira, Carthage, and Cerne), were acquainted with Porto Santo 
Madeira, and the Canary Islands. In a long series of events, 
we willingly seek to trace the first and guiding link of the 
chain. It is probable that fully 2000 years elapsed from thev 
foundation of Tartessus and Utica by Phoenicians, to the dis- 
covery of America by the northern course, that is to say, to 
Eric Randau's voyage to Greenland, which was followed by 
voyages to North Carolina ; and that 2500 years intervened 
before Christopher Columbus, starting from the old Phcenician 
settlement of Gadeira, made the passage by the southwest 
route. =^ 

In accordance with the requirements for the generalization 
of ideas demanded by the present work, I have considered the 
discovery of a group of islands lying only 1G8 miles from the 
African shore as the first member of a long series of similarly- 
directed eflbrts, but I have made no allusion to the Elysium, 
the Islands of the Blessed, fabled by the poetic visions of 
fancy, as situated on the confines of the earth, in an ocean 
warmed by the rays of the near setting sun. All the enjoy- 
ments of life and the choicest products of nature were sup- 
posed to be placed at the remotest distance of the terrestrial 
globe. t The ideal land — the geographical myth of the Elys- 
ion — was removed further to the west, even beyond the Pil- 
lars of Hercules, as the knowledge of the Mediterranean was 
extended among the Hellenic races. True cosmical knowl- 
edge, and the earliest discoveries of the Phoenicians, regard- 

* Strabo, lib. xvii., p. 826. The destruction of Phoenician colonies by 
Nigritians (lib. ii., p. 131) appears to indicate a very eouthern locality; 
more so, perhaps, than the crocodiles and elephants mentioned by Han- 
no, since both these were certainly, at one period, found north of the 
desert of Sahara, in Maurusia, and in the whole western Atl»s country, 
as is proved from Strabo, lib. xvii., p. 827 ; -/Elian., DeNat Anim., vii., 
2 ; Plin., v., 1, and from many occurrences in the wars betw6v-a Rome 
and Carthage. See, on this important subject, referrinf to the geogra- 
phy of animals, Cuvier, Ossemens Fossiles, 2 ed., t. i., p. 74, and Qui* 
trem^re, op. cit,, p. 391-394 * Her^c.^ -*i., 106. 



134 COSMOS 

ing wnose precise period no certain tidings have come down 
to us, did not probably give rise to this myth of the " Islands 
of the Blessed," the application to which was made subse- 
quently. Geographical discovery has merely embodied a phan- 
tom of the imagination, to which it served as a substratum. 

Later writers (as an unknown compiler of the Collection oj 
Wonderful Relations ascribed to Aristotle, who made use of 
rimaeus, and more especially of Diodorus Siculus) have spoken 
of " Pleasant Islands," which must be supposed to be the Ca- 
naries, and of the great storms to which their accidental dis- 
covery is due. It is said that " Phoenician and Carthaginian 
vessels, which were sailing toward the settlements already 
then founded on the coast of Libya, were driven out to sea." 
This event is supposed to have occurred in the early period of 
the Tyrrhenian navigation, and in that of the contest between 
the Tyrrhenian Pelasgians and Phosnicians. Statius Sebosus 
and the Nuraidian king Juba first gave names to the separate 
islands, but, unfortunately, not Punic names, although undoubt- 
edly in accordance with notices taken from Punic works. As 
Plutarch says that Sertorius, when driven away from Spain, 
wished to save himself and his attendants, after the loss of his 
fleet, on a group of two Atlantic islands, ten thousand stadia 
to the west of the mouth of the Bsetis, it has been supposed 
that he meant to designate the two islands of Porto Santo and 
Madeira,* which were clearly indicated by Pliny as the Pur- 

* I have treated in detail this often-contested subject, as well as the 
passages of Diodorus (v. 19 and 20), and of the Pseudo-Aristot. (Mirab. 
AiiscnU., cap. 85, p. 172, Bekk.), in another work {Examen Crit.. t, i., 
p. 130-139 ; t. ii., p. 158 and 169 ; t. iii., p. 137-140). The compiiation 
of the Mirab. Auscult. appears to have been of a date prior to the end 
of the first Punic. war, since, in cap. 105, p. 211, it describes Sardinia 
as under the dominion of the Carthaginians. It is also worthy of notice 
that the wood-clad island, which is mentioned in this work, is described 
as uninhabited (therefore not peopled by Guanches). The whole group 
of the Canary Islands was inhabited by Guanches, but not the island of 
Madeira, in which no inhabitants were found either by John Gonzalves 
and Tristan Vaz in 1519, or, still earlier, by Robert Masham and Anna 
Dorset (supposing their Crusoe-like narrative to possess a character of 
veracity). Heeren applies the description of Diodorus to Madeira alone ; 
yet he thinks that in the account of Festus Avienus (v. 164), who is so 
conversant with Punic writings, he can recognize the frequent volcanic 
earthquakes of the Peak of Teneriffe. (See Ideen uber Politik und Han- 
del, th. ii., abth. i., 1826, s. 106.) To judge from the geographical con- 
nection, the description of Avienus would appear to indicate a more 
northern locality, perhaps even the Kronic Sea. (^Examen Crit., t. iii., 
p. 138.) Ammianus Marcellinus (xxii., 15) also notices the Punic 
sources of which Juba availed himself. Respecting the probability of 
the Semitic origin of the appellation of the Canary Islands (the dog 



PHYSICAL CONTEMPLATION OF THE UNIVERSE. l35 

purariee. The strong oceanic current, which is directed be- 
yond the Pillars of Hercules from northwest to southeast, might 
long have prevented the coast navigators from discovering the 
islands most remote from the continent, and of which only the 
smaller, Porto Santo, was found to be inhabited in the fif- 
teenth century ; and, owing to the curvature of the Earth, 
the summit of the great volcano of Teneriffe could not be 
seen, even with a strong refraction, by Phoenician mariners 
sailing along the coast, although I found, from my own ob- 
servations, that it was discernible from the slight elevations 
that surround Cape Bojador,* especially in cases of eruption, 
and by the reflection of a high cloud resting over the volcano. 
It is even asserted that eruptions of Mount ^tna have been 
seen, in recent times, from Mount Taygetos in Greece.! 

island of Pliny's Latin etymology !), see Credner's Biblische Vorstellung 
vom Paradiese, in lUgen's Zeitschr.fur die Historische Theologie, bd. vi., 
1836, 8. 166-186. Joaquim Jose da Costa de Macedo, in a work en- 
titled Memoria em que se pretende provar que os Arabes nao conhecerao 
as Canarias antes dos Portuguezes, 1844, has recently collected all that 
has been written from the most ancient times to the Middle Ages re- 
specting the Canary Islands, Where history, so far as it is founded on 
certain and distinctly-expressed evidence, is silent, there remain only 
different degrees of probability ; but an absolute denial of all facts in 
the world's history, of which the evidence is not distinct, appears to mo 
no happy application of philological and historical criticism. The many 
indications which have come down to us from antiquity, and a careful 
consideration of the relations of geographical proximity to ancient un- 
doubted settlements on the African shore, lead me to believe that the 
Canary Islands were known to the Phoenicians, Carthaginians, Greeks, 
and Romans, perhaps even to the Etruscans. 

* Compare the calculations in my Rel. Hist., t. i., p. 140 and 287. 
The Peak of Teneriffe is distant 2° 49' of an arc from the nearest point 
if the African coast. In assuming a mean refraction of 0*08, the sum- 
mit of the Peak may be seen from a height of 1291 feet, and, therefore, 
from the Montarias Negras, not far from Cape Bojador. In this calcu 
lation, the elevation of the Peak above the level of the sea has bee» 
taken at 12,175 feet; Captain Vidal has recently determined it trigo 
noraetrically at 12,405, and Messrs. Coupvent and Dumoulin, baromet 
rically, at 12,150. (D'Urville, Voyage au Pole Sud, Hist., t. i., 1842, p 
31, 32.) But Lancerote, with a volcano, la Corona, 1918 feet in height 
(Leop. v. Buch, Canarische Inseln, s. 104), and Fortaventixra, lie mucb 
nearer to the main land than Teneriffe ; the distance of the first-named 
island being 1° 15', and that of the second 1^ 2'. 

t Ross has only mentioned this assertion as a report (HelleniJca, bd. 
i., 8. xi.). May the observation not have rested on a mere deception? 
If we take the elevation of ^tna above the sea at 10,874 feet (lat. 37° 
45', long, from Paris 12° 41'), and that of the place of observation, on 
the Taygetos (Mount Elias), at 7904 feet (lat. 36° 57^ long, from Paris 
20* 1'), and the distance between the two at 352 geographical miles, 
we have for the point from which light was emitted above iEtna, and 
waa visible on Taygetos, fully 48,675 feet, which is four and a half 



130 COSMOS. 

In the enumeration of the elements of an extended knowl 
edge of the universe, which were early brought to the Greeks 
from other parts of the Mediterranean basin, we have hither- 
to followed the Phoenicians and Carthaginians in their inter- 
course with the northern tin and amber lands, as well as in 
their settlements near the tropics, on the west coast of Africa. 
It now, therefore, only remains for us to refer to a voyage of 
the Phoenicians to the south, when they proceeded 4000 geo- 
graphical miles east of Cerne and Hanno's Western Horn, far 
within the tropics, to the Prasodic and Indian Seas. What- 
ever doubt may exist regarding the localization of the distant 
gold lands (Ophir and Supara), and whether these gold lands 
are the western coasts of the Indian Peninsula or the eastern 
shores of Africa, it is, at any rate, certain that this active, 
enterprising Semitic race, who so early employed alphabetical 
writing, had a direct acquaintance with the products of the 
most different climates, from the Cassiterides to the south of 
the Straits of Bab-el-Mandeb, far within the tropics. The 
Tyrian flag floated simultaneously in the British and Indian 
Seas. The Phoenicians had commercial settlements in the 
northern parts of the Arabian Gulf in the ports of Elath and 
Ezion-Geber, as well as on the Persian Gulf at Aradus and 
Tylos, where, according to Strabo, temples had been erected, 
which, in their style of architecture, resembled those on the 
Mediterranean.* The caravan trade, which was carried on 
by the Phoenicians in seeking spices and incense, was directed 
to Arabia Felix, through Palmyra, and to the Chaldean or 
Nabathseic Gerrha, on the western or Arabian side of the Per- 
sian Gulf 

The expeditions sent by Hiram and Solomon, and which 
were undertaken conjointly by Tyrians and Israelites, sailed 
from Ezion-Geber through the Straits of Bab-el-Mandeb to 
Ophir (Opheir, Sophir, Sophora, the Sanscrit Supara of Ptol- 
emy). t Solomon, who loved pomp, caused a fleet to be con- 
times greater than the elevation of ^tna. If, however, we might as- 
sume, as my friend Professor Encke has remarked, the reflecting sur- 
face to be 184 miles from .^tna and 168 miles from Taygetos, its height 
above the sea would only require to be 1829 feet. 

* Strabo, lib. xvi., p. 767, Casaub. According to Polybius, it would 
eeem that the Euxine and the Adriatic Sea were discernible from 
Mount Aimon — an assertion ridiculed by Strabo (lib. vii., p. 313) 
Compare Scymuus, p. 93. 

t On the synonym of Ophir, see my Examen Crit. de VHist. de la 
Giographie, t. ii., p. 42. Ptoleray, in lib. vi., cap. 7, p. 156, speaks of 
a Sapphara, the metropolis of A "ab'a ; and in lib. vii., cap. 1, p. 168, of 



PHYSICAL CONTEMPLATION OF THE UNIVERSE. 137 

Btructed at the Red Sea, and Hiram Supplied him with expe- 
rienced Phoenician seamen, and Tyrian vessels, *' ships of 
Tarshish."* The articles of commerce which were brought 
from Ophir were gold, silver, sandal-wood [alguminin), pre- 
cious stones, ivory, apes {kophim), and peacocks (thukkiim). 
These are not Hebrew, but Indian names.t It would appear 
highly probable, from the careful investigations of Gesenius, 
Benfey, and Lassen, that the Phoenicians, who had been early 

Supara, in the Gulf of Camboya (Barigazenus Sinus, according to Hesy- 
chius), as " a district rich in gold !" Supara signifies in Indian a /air 
thore (Lassen, Diss, de Taprobane, p. 18, and Indische Alter thumskunde, 
bd. i., s.'107 ; also Professor Keil, of Dorpat, Ueber die Hiram-Salomo- 
nische Schiffahrt nach Ophir und Tarsis, s. 40-45). 

* On the question whether sliips of Tarshish mean ocean ships, or 
xvhether, as Michaelis contends, they have their name from the Phoeni- 
cian Tarsus, in Cilicia, see Keil, op. cit., s. 7, 15-22, and 71-84. 

t Gesenius, Thesaurus LingucB Hebr., t. i., p. 141 ; and the same in 
the Encycl. of Ersoh and Gruber, sect, iii., th. iv., s. 401 ; Lassen, Ind. 
Alterthumskunde, bd. i., s. 538; Reiiiaud, Relation des Voyages f aits par 
les Arabes dans VInde et en Chine, t. 4., 1845, p. xxviii. The learned 
Quatremdre, who, in a very recently-published treatise {Mem, de VAcad. 
des Inscriptions, t. xvi., Part ii., 1845, p. 349-402), still maintains, w^ith 
Heeren, that Ophir is the east coasi of Africa, has explained the word 
thuJckiim {thukkiyyim) as parrots, or Guinea-fowls, and not peacocks (p. 
375). Regarding Sokotora, compare Bohlen, Das alte Indien, th. ii,, s. 
139, with Benfey, Indien, s. 30-32. Sofala is described by Edrisi (in 
Amedee Jaubert's translation, t. i., p. 67), and subsequently by the 
Portuguese, after Gama's voyage of discovery {Barros, Dec. i., liv. x., 
cap. i. ; Part ii., p. 375; Kiilb, Geschichte der Entdeckungsreisen, th. i., 
1841, s. 236), as a country rich in gold. I have elsewhere drawn atten- 
tion to the fact that Edrisi, in the middle of the twelfth century, speaks 
of the application of quicksilver in the gold-washings of the negroes of 
this district, as a long-known process of amalgamation. When we bear 
in mind the great frequency of the interchange of r and /, we find that 
the name of the East African Sofala is perfectly represented by that of 
6ophara, which is used, with several other forms, in the version of the 
Septuagint, for the Ophir of Solomon and Hiram. Ptolemy also, as has 
been already noticed, was acquainted with a Sapphara, in Arabia (Hit- 
ter, Asien, bd. viii., 1, 1846, s. 252), and a Supara in India. The signif- 
icant (Sanscrit) names of the mother country had been conferred on 
neighboring or opposite coasts, as we find, under similar relations in 
the present day, in the Spanish and English parts of America. The 
trade to Ophir might thus, according to my view, be extended in the 
same manner as a Phoenician expedition to Tartessus might touch at 
Cyrene and Carthage, Gadeira and Cerne, and as one to the Cassiterides 
might touch at the Artabrian, British, and East Cimbrian coasts. It is 
nevertheless remarkable that incense, spices, silk, and cotton cloth are 
not named among the wares from Ophir, together with ivory, apes, and 
peacocks. The latter are exclusively Indian, although, on account of 
their gradual extension to the west, they were frequently termed by 
the Greeks " Median and Persian birds ;" the Samians even supposed 
them to have belonged originally to Samos, on account of their being 



138 COSMOS. 

made acquainted with the periodic prevalence of the monsoons 
through their colonies on the Persian Gulf, and their inter- 
course with the inhabitants of Gerrha, must have visited the 
western coasts of the Indian Peninsula. Christopher Colum- 
bus was even persuaded that Ophir (the El Dorado of Solo- 
mon) and Mount Sopora were a portion of Eastern Asia, the 
CJiersonesus Aurea of Ptolemy. =^ As it appears difficult to 
form an idea of Western India as a fruitful source of gold, it 
will, I think, scarcely be necessary to refer to the " gold-seek- 
ing ants" (or to the unmistakable account given by Ctesias 
of a foundery in which, however, gold and iron were said, ac- 
cording to his account, to be fused together),! it being sufficient 
to direct attention to the geographical proximity of Southern 
Arabia, of the island of Dioscorides (the Diu Zokotora of the 
moderns, a corruption of the Sanscrit Dvipa Sukhatara), cul- 
tivated by Indian colonists, and to the auriferous coast of 
Sofala in Eastern Africa. Arabia and the island last referred 
to, to the southeast of the Straits of Bab-el-Mandeb, may be 
regarded as affording intermediate links of connection between 
the Indian Peninsula and Eastern Africa for the combined 
commerce of the Hebrews and Phoenicians. The Indians had, 

reared by the priests in the sanctuary of Hera. From a passage in 
Eustathius (Comm. in Eiad, t. iv., p. 225, ed. Lips., 1827) on the sacred- 
ness of peacocks in Libya, it has been unjustly inferred that the Tcjuf 
also belonged to Africa. 

* See the remarks of Columbus on Ophir and el Monte Sopora, 
" which Solomon's fleet could not reach within a terra of three years," 
in Navarrele, Viages y Descubrimientos que hiciiron los Espanoles, t. i., 
p. 103. In another work, the great discoverer says, still in the hope 
of reaching Ophir, "the excellence and power of the gold of Ophir 
can not be described ; he who possesses it does what he will in this 
world ; nay, it even enables him to draw souls from purgatory to para- 
dise" (" llega a que echa las animas al paraiso"), Carta del Almirante, 
eacrita en la Jamaica, 1503 ; Navarrete, t. i., p. 309. (Compare my 
Examen Critique, t. i., p. 70 and 109 ; t. ii., p. 38-44 ; and on the prop- 
er duration of the Tarshish voyage, see Keil, op. cit., s. 106.) 

t CtesicB Cnidii Operum Reliqviee, ed. Felix Baehr, 1824, cap. iv. and 
xii., p. 248, 271, and 300. But the accounts collected by the physician 
at the Persian court from native sources, which are not, therefore, alto- 
gether to be rejected, refer to districts in the north of India, and from 
these the gold of the Daradas must have come by many circuitous routes 
to Abhira, the rrftuth of the Indus, and the coast of Malabar. (Com- 

Eare vay Asie Centrale, t. i., p. 157, and Lassen, Ind. Alterthumskundc, 
d. i., 8. 5.) May not the wonderful story related by Ctesias of an 
Indian spring, at the bottom of which iron was found, which was very 
malleable when the fluid gold had run off', have been based on a mis- 
understood account of a foundery ? The molten iron was probably 
taken for gold owing to its color, and when the yellow color had disap- 
peared in cooling, the black mass of iron was found below it. 



PHYSICAL CONTEMPLATION OF THE UNIVERSE. 139 

from the earliest time, made settlements in the eastern part 
of AlVica, and on the coasts immediately opposite their native 
country ; and the traders to Ophir might have found, in the 
basin of the Erythreian and Indian Seas, other sources of gold 
besides India itself 

Less influential than the Phoenicians in extending the geo 
graphical sphere of our views, and early affected by the Greek 
influence of a band of Pelasgian Tyrrhenians, who invaded 
their country from the sea, the Etruscans present themselves 
to our observation as a gloomy and stern race. They carried 
on no inconsiderable inland trade to distant amber countries, 
through Northern Italy and across the Alps, where a via 
sacra* was protected by all the neighboring tribes. The 
primitive Tuscan race of the Rasense appears to have follow- 
ed almost the same road on their way from Rhsetia to the 
Padus, and even further southward. In accordance with our 
object, which is always to seize on the most general and per- 
manent features, we would here consider the influence which 
the general character of the Etruscans exercised on the most 
ancient political institutions of Rome, and through these on 
the whole of Roman life. It may be said that the reflex ac- 
tion of this influence still persists in its secondary and remote 
political effects, inasmuch as, for ages, Rome stamped her 
character, with more or less permanence, on the civilization 
and mental culture of mankind. t 

A peculiar characteristic of the Tuscans, which demands 
our special notice in the present work, was their inclination 
for cultivating an intimate connection with certain natural 
phenomena. Divination, which was the occupation of their 
equestrian hierarchical caste, gave occasion for a daily observ- 
ation of the meteorological processes of the atmosphere. The 
JFulguratores, observers of lightning, occupied themselves in 
investigating the direction of the lightning, with " drawing it 
down," and " turning it aside. "J They carefully distinguished 

* Aristot., Mirab. AusculL, cap. 86 and 111, p. 175 and 225, Bekk. 

t Die Etrusker, by Otfried MUller, abth. ii., s. 350 ; Niebuhr, Romische 
Geschichte, th. ii., s. 380. 

X The story formerly current in Germany, and reported on the testi. 
mony of Father Angelo Cortenovis, that the tomb described by Varro 
of the hero of Clusiura, Lars Porsena, ornamented with a bronze hat 
and bronze pendant chains, was an apparatus for collecting atmospher- 
ical electricity, or for conducting lightning (as were also, according to 
Michaelis, the metal points on Solomon's temple), was related at a time 
when men were inclined to attribute to the ancients the remains of a 
«upernaturally-revealed primitive knowledge of physics, which was, 
however, soon again obscured. The most important notice of the rel» 



140 COSMOS. 

between flashes of lightning from the higher regions cf the 
clouds, and those which Saturn, an earth god,* caused to 
ascend from below, and which were called Saturnine-terres- 
trial lightning, a distinction which modern physicists have 
thought worthy of especial attention. Thus were established 
regular official notices of the occurrence of storms. t The 
Aqucelicium, the art of discovering springs of waters, whi(;h 
was much practiced by the Etruscans, and the drawing forth 
of water by their Aquileges, indicate a careful investigation 
of the natural stratification of rocks and of the inequalities of 
the ground. Diodorus, on this account, extols the Etruscans 
as industrious inquirers of nature. We may add to this com- 
mendation that the patrician and powerful hierarchical caste 
of the Tarquinii ofiered the rare example of favoring physical 
science. 

We have spoken of the ancient seats of human civilization 
in Egypt, Phoenicia, and Etruria, before proceeding to the 
highly-gifted Hellenic races, with whose culture our own civ- 

tions between lightning and conducting metals (which it was not diffi- 
cult to discover) appears to me to be that of Ctesias (Indica, cap. 4, p. 
16.9, ed. Lion ; p. 248, ed. Baehr). " He had possessed, it is said, two 
iron swords, presents from the King Artaxerxes Mnemon, and from 
Parysatis, the mother of the latter, which, when planted in the earth, 
averted clouds, hail, and strokes of lightning. He had himself seen the 
results of this operation, for the king had twice made the experiment 
before his eyes." The great attention paid by the Etruscans to the 
meteorological processes of the atmosphere in all that differed from the 
ordinary course of natural phenomena, makes it certainly a cause for 
regret that nothing has come down to us from the books of the Fulgu- 
rate res. The epochs of the appearance of great comets, of the fall of 
meteoric stones, and of showers of falling stars, were no doubt recorded 
in them, as in the more ancient Chinese annals made use of by Edonard 
Biot. Creuzer {Symbolik und Mythologie der alten Volher, th. iii., 1842, 
B. 659) has endeavored to prove that the natural features of Etruria acted 
on the peculiar direction of mind of its inhabitants. A " calling forth" 
of the lightning, which is ascribed to Prometheus, calls to mind the 
strange pretended "drawing down" of lightning by the Fulguratores. 
This operation consisted, however, in a mere conjuration, which was 
probably not more efficacious than the skinned ass's head, supposed, in 
accordance with Etruscan religious usages, to have the faculty of pre- 
serving against the danger of thunder-storms. 

* Otfr. Miiller, Etrusker, abth. ii., s. 162-178. It would appear that, 
in accordance with the very complicated Etruscan augur-theory, a dis- 
tinction was made between the " soft reminding lightnings propelled 
by Jupiter by his own independent power, and the violent electrical 
means of chastisement which he could only send forth in obedience to 
established constitutional prescriptions, after consulting with the othei 
twelve gods" (Seneca, Nat. Q,u(B9t.,\\., p. 41). 

t Joh. Lydus, De Ostentis, ed. Hase, p. 18, in praefat 



PHYSICAL CONTEMPLAllON OF THE UNIVERSE. 141 

ilization is most deeply rooted, and from whom we have de- 
rived a considerable portion of our early knowledge of other 
nations, and of our views regarding the universe. We have 
considered the basin of the Mediterranean in its characteristic 
configuration and position, and the influence of these relations 
on the commercial intercourse established with the western 
coasts of Africa, the extreme north, and the Indo- Arabian 
Sea. No portion of the earth has been the theater of greater 
changes of power, or of greater or more animated activity un- 
der the influence of mental guidance. This movement was 
transmitted far and enduringly by the Greeks and Romans, 
especially after the latter had destroyed the Phcenicio-Cartha- 
ginian power. That which we term the beginning of history 
is, therefore, only the period when later generations awoke to 
self-consciousness. It is one of the advantages of the present 
age that, by the brilliant progress that has been made in gen- 
eral and comparative philology, by the careful investigation 
of monuments and their more certain interpretation, the views 
of the historical inquirer are daily enlarged, and the strata of 
remote antiquity gradually opened, as it were, before our eyes. 
Besides the civilized nations of the Mediterranean which we 
have just enumerated, there are many others v/ho show traces 
of ancient cultivation ; among these we may mention the 
Phrygians and Lycians in Western Asia, and the Turduli and 
Turdetani in the extreme West.* Of the latter, Strabo ob- 
serves, " they are the most cultivated of all the Iberians ; they 
employ the art of writing, and have written books containing 
memorials of ancient times, and also poems and laws set in 
verse, for which they claim an antiquity of six thousand years." 
I have dwelt on these separate examples in order to show 
how much of ancient cultivation, even among European na- 
tions, has been lost without our being able to discover any 
trace of its existence, and how the history of the earliest con- 
templation of the universe must continue to be limited to a 
very narrow compass. 

Beyond the forty-eighth degree of latitude, north of the Sea 
of Azof and of the Caspian, between the Don, the Wolga, and 
the Jaik, where the latter flows from the southern auriferous 

* Strabo, lib. iii., p. 139, Casaub. Compare Wilhelra von Humboldt, 
Ueber die Urbewohner Hispaniens, 1821, 8. 123 und 131-136. The Iberian 
alphabet has been successfully investigated in our own times by M. de 
Saulcy; the Phrygian, by the ingenious discoverer of arrow-headed 
writing, Grotefend ; and the Lyciar by Sir Charles Fellowes. (Coiu^ 
pare Ross, Hellenika, bd. i., s. xvi.) 



142 COSMOS. 

TJralian Mountains, Europe and Asia are, as it were, fused to* 
gether by flat steppes. Herodotus, in the same manner as 
Pherecydes of Syros had previously done, regarded the whole 
of northern Scythian Asia (Siberia) as belonging to Sarmatian 
Europe, and even as forming a portion of Europe itself* To- 
ward the south, our quarter of the globe is sharply separated 
from Asia, but the far-projecting peninsula of Asia Minor and 
the richly- varied -ZEgean Archipelago (serving as a bridge be- 
tween the two separate continents) have afforded an easy 
passage for different races, languages, customs, and manners. 
Western Asia has, from the earliest ages, been the great thor- 
oughfare for races migrating from the east, as was the north- 
west of Greece for the Illyric races. The JEgeam Archipelago, 
which was in turn subject to Phcenician, Persian, and Greek 
dominion, was the intermediate link between Greece and the 
far East. 

When Phrygia was incorporated with Lydia, and both 
merged into the Persian empire, the contact led to the gen- 
eral extension of the sphere of ideas among Asiatic and Eu- 
ropean Greeks. The Persian rule was extended by the war- 
like expeditions of Cambyses and Darius Hystaspes from Gy- 
rene and the Nile to the fruitful lands of the Euphrates and 
the Indus. A Greek, Scylax of Karyanda, was employed to 
explore the course of the Indus, from the then-existing terri- 
tory of Caschmeer (Kaspapyrus)t to its mouth. An active 
intercourse was carried on between Greece and Egypt (with 
Naucratis and the Pelusian arm of the Nile) before the Per- 
sian conquest, and even under Psammitichus and Amasis.J 
These extensive relations of intercourse with other nations 
drew many Greeks from their native land, not only for the 
purpose of establishing those distant colonies which we shall 
consider in a subsequent part of the present work, but also as 
hired soldiers, who formed the nucleus of foreign armies in 
Carthage, § Egypt, Babylon, Persia, and in the Bactrian dis- 
trict of the Oxus. 

A deeper insight into the individuality and national char- 
acter of the different Greek races has shown that, if a grave 

* Herod., iv., 42 (Schweighauser ad Herod., t. v., p. 204). Com- 
pare Humboldt, Asie Centrale, t. i., p. 54 and 577. 

t Regarding the most probable etymology of Kaspapyrus of Heca- 
taeus {Fragm., ed. Klausen, No. 179, v. 94), and the Kaspatyrus of 
Herodotus (iii., 102, and iv., 44), see my Asie Centrale, t. i., p. 101-104. 

X Regarding Psammitichus and Aahmes, see ante, p. 127. 

$ Droysen, Gesckichte der Bildung des Hellenistischen Staatensystem$ 
1843, s. 23 



PHYSICAL CONTEMPLATION OF THE UNIVERSE. 143 

and reserved exclusiveness prevailed among the Dorians, and 
in part, also, among the -Cohans, we must, on the other hand, 
ascribe to the gayer Ionic race a mobility of mind, which, un- 
der the stimulus of an eager spirit of inquiry, and an ever- 
wakeful activity, was alike manifested in a faculty for mental 
contemplation and sensuous perception. Directed by the ob- 
jective bent of their mode of thought, and adorned by a luxu- 
riance of fancy in poetry and in art, the lonians scattered the 
beneficent germs of progressive cultivation wherever they estab- 
lished their colonies in other countries. 

As the landscape of Greece was so strikingly characterized 
by the peculiar charm of an intimate blending of land and sea, 
the configuration of the coast-line to which this character was 
owing could not fail early to awaken in the minds of the 
Greeks a taste for navigation, and to excite them to an active 
commercial intercourse and contact with foreign nations.* 
The maritime dominion of the Cretans and Rhodians was fol- 
lowed by the expeditions of the Samians, Phocseans, Taphians, 
and Thesprotians, which were, it must be owned, originally 
directed to plunder and to the capture of slaves. Hesiod's 
disinclination to a sea-faring life is probably to be regarded 
merely as the expression of an individual opinion, or as the re- 
sult of a timid ignorance of nautical affairs, which may have 
prevailed on the main land of Greece at the early dawn of 
civilization. On the other hand, the most ancient legends 
and myths abound in reference to distant expeditions by land 
and sea, as if the youthful imagination of mankind delighted 
in the contrast between its own ideal creations and a limited 
reality. In illustration of this sentiment we may mention the 
expeditions of Dionysus and Hercules (Melkarth in the tem- 
ple at Gadeira) ; the wanderings of lo ;t of the often-resusci 
tated Aristeas ; and of the Hyperborean magician Abaris, in 
whose " guiding arrow" J some commentators have supposed 
that they recognized the compass. In these narratives we trace 

* See ante, p. 25. 

t V6lker, Mythische Geographic der Griecken und Romer, th. i., 1832, 
a. 1-10 ; Klausen, Ueber die Wanderungen der lo und des Herakles, iu 
Niebuhr and Brandis Rhemische Miiseen fur Pkilologie, GeschicJite una 
Griech. Philosophie, Jahrg., iii., 1829, s. 293-323. 

t In the myth of Abaris (Herod., iv., 36), the magician does not travel 
through the air on an arrow, but he carries the arrow, " which Pythag- 
oras gave him (Jambl., De Vita Pythag., xxix., p. 194, Kiessling), in 
order that it may be useful to him in all difficulties on his long journey." 
Creuzer, Symbolik, th. ii., 1841, s. 660-664. On the repeatedly disap 
p€&gt;aring and reappearing Arimaspiaa bard, Aristeas of Proconnesus, 6e9 
Herod., iv., 13-15. 



144 COSMOS. 

the reciprocal reflection of passing events and ancient cosmical 
views, and the progressive modification which the latter effect- 
ed in these mythical representations of histoiy. In the wan- 
derings of the heroes returning from Troy, Aristonicus makes 
Menelaus circumnavigate Africa more than five hundred years 
before Neco sailed from Gadeira to India.* 

At the period which we are here considering, of the history 
of Greece before the Macedonian expeditions into Asia, there 
occurred three events which exercised a special influence in 
extending the views of the Greeks regarding the universe. 
These events were the attempts to penetrate beyond the basin 
of the Mediterranean toward the east ; the attempts toward 
the west ; and the establishment of numerous colonies from 
the Pillars of Hercules to the northeastern extremity of the 
Euxine, which, by the more varied form of their political con- 
stitution, and by their furtherance of mental cultivation, were 
more influential than those of the Phcenicians and Cartha- 
ginians in the iEgean Sea. Sicily, Theria, and on the north 
and west coasts of Africa. 

The advance toward the East, about twelve centuries be- 
fore our era, or one hundred and fifty years after Rameses 
Miamoun (Sesostris), is known in history as the expedition 
of the Argonauts to Colchis. The true version of this event, 
which is clothed in a mythical garb, and concealed under a 
blending of ideal images, is simply the fulfillment of a national 
desire to open the inhospitable Euxine. The myth of Prome- 
theus, and the unbinding of the fire-kindling Titan on the 
Caucasus by Hercules, during his expedition to the East ; the 
ascent of lo from the Valley of the Hybritesf to the heights 
of the Caucasus ; the myth of Phryxus and Helle, all indicate 

* Strabo, lib. i., p. 38, Casaub. 

t Probably the Valley of the Don or of the Kuban. See my Asie Cen- 
trale, t. ii., p. 164. Pherecydes expressly says {Fragm. 37, ex Schol. 
Apollon., ii., 1214) that the Caucasus burned, and that, therefore, Ty- 
phon fled to Italy ; a notice from which Klausen, in the work already 
mentioned, s. 298, explains the ideal relation of the " fire-kindler" 
(^TTvpKaevq), Prometheus, to the burning mountain. Although the geog- 
nostical constitution of the Caucasus (which has been recently so ably 
investigated by Abich), and its connection with the volcanic chain of 
the Thianschan, in the interior of Asia (which I think I have shown in 
my Atie Centrcde, t. ii., p. 55-59), render it in no way improbable that 
reminiscences of great volcanic eruptions may have been preserved in 
the nost ancient traditions of men, yet we may rather assume that a 
bold and somewhat hazardous spirit of etymological conjecture may 
have led the Greeks to the hypothesis of the burning. On the Sanscrit 
etymologies of Graucasus (or shining mountain), see Bohlen's and Bui* 
nouf 8 Btatementft, in my Asie Centrale, t. i., p. 109. 



PHYSICAL. CONTEMPLATION OF THE UNIVERSE. 145 

the same direction of the course on which the early Phoenician 
navigators had adventured. 

Before the migrations of the Dorians and JEoUans, the Bojo- 
tian Orchomenus, near the eastern extremity of the Lake of 
Copais, was already a rich commercial city of the Minyans. 
The Argonautic expedition began at lolcus, the principal seat 
of the Thessalian Minyans, on the Pagassean Gulf. The 
locality of the myth, considered with respect to the aim of the 
undertaking, after having been variously modified* at different 
times, was finally associated with the mouth of the Phasis 
(Rion), and with Colchis, a seat of ancient civilization, instead 
of with the uncertain and remote land of jJEa. The expedi- 
tions of the Milesians and their numerous colonial cities on 
the Euxine enabled them to obtain a more exact knowledge 
of the eastern and northern limits of that sea, and thus gave 
a more definite outline to the geographical portion of the myth. 
A number of important new views was thus simultaneouslj 
opened. The Caspian had long been known only on its west- 
ern coast ; and even HecatsBus regarded this shore as the west- 
ern boundary of the encircling Eastern Ocean. t The father 
of history was the first who taught that the Caspian Sea was 
a basin closed on all sides, a fact which, after him, was again 
contested, for six centuries, until the time of Ptolemy; 

* Otfried MUUer, Minyer, s. 247, 254, iind 274. Homer was oot ac- 
quainted with the Phasis, or with Colchis, or with the Fuiars of Her- 
cules ; but the Phasis is named by Hesiod. The mythical traditions con- 
cerning the return of the Argonauts through the Phasis into the Eastern 
Ocean, and across the " double" Triton Lake, formed either by the 
conjectured bifurcation of the Ister, or by volcanic earthquakes {Asie 
Centrale, t. i., p. 179 ; t. iii., p. 135-137 ; Otfr. MUller, Minyer, s. 357), 
are especially important in arriving at a knowledge of the earliest views 
regarding the form of the continents. The geographical phantasies of 
Peisandros, Timagetus, and Apollonius of Rhodes were continued until 
late in the Middle Ages, and showed themselves sometimes as bewilder- 
ing and deterring obstacles, and sometimes as stimulating incitements 
to actual discoveries. This reaction of antiquity on later times, when 
men suffered themselves to be led more by opinions than by actual ob- 
servations, has not been hitherto sufficiently considered in the history 
of geography. My object is not merely to present bibliographical 
sources from the literature of different nations for the elucidation of the 
facts advanced in the text, but also to introduce into these notes, which 

Eermit of greater freedom, such abundant materials for reflection as I 
ave been, able to derive from my own experience and from long-con- 
tinued literary studies. 

t Hecattei, Fragm., ed. Klausen, p. 39, 92, 98, and 119. See, also, 
my investigations on the history of the geography of the Caspian Sea, 
from Herodotus down to the Arabian El-Ist^chri, Edrisi, and Ibn-el- 
Vardi, on the Sea of Aral, and on the bifurcation of the Oxus and the 
Araxes, in my Asie Centrale. t. ii., p. 162-2.07. 
Vol. II.— G 



146 COSMOS. 

At the northeastern extremity of the Black Sea a wile field 
was also opened to ethnology. Astonishment was felt at the 
multiplicity of languages among the different races,* and the 
necessity for skillful interpreters (the first aids and rough in- 
struments in a comparative study of languages) was keenly 
felt. The intercourse established by barter and trade was 
carried from the Mceotic Gulf, then supposed to be of very 
vast extent, over the Steppe where the central Kirghis horde 
now pasture their flocks, through a chain of the Scythio-Sco- 
lotic tribes of the Argippaeans and Issedones,t whom I regard 
as of Tndo-Germanic origin, to the Arimaspes on the northern 
declivity of the Altai Mountains, who possessed large treasures 
in gold4 Here, therefore, Ave have the ancient realm of the 

* Cramer, De Studiis qucB veteres ad aliarum gentium contvlerint Lin* 
ffuas, 1844, p. 8 and 17. The ancient Colchians appear to have been 
identical with the tribe of the Lazi (Lazi, gentes Colchorum, Plin., vi., 
i ; the Aai^oi of Byzantine writers) ; see Vater (Professor in Kasan), 
Der Argonautenzug aus den Quellen dargestellt, 1845, Heft. !., s. 24; 
Heft, ii., s. 45, 57, und 103. In the Caucasus, the names Alaui (Alane- 
thi, for the land of the Alani), Ossi, and Ass may still be heard. Ac- 
cording to the investigations be^un with a truly philosophic and philo- 
logical spirit by George Rosen in the Valleys of the Caucasus, the Ian 
guage spoken by the Lazi possesses remains of the ancient Colchian 
idiom. The Iberian and Grussic family of languages includes the La- 
ziaa, Georgian, Suanian, and Mingrelian, all belonging to the group of 
the Indo-Germanic languages. The language of the Osseti bears a great- 
or affinity to the Gothic than to the Lithuanian. 

t On the relationship of the Scythians (Scolotes or Sacae), Alani, 
Goths, Massagetffi, and the Yueti of the Chinese historians, see Klaproth, 
in the commentary to the Voyage du Comte Potocki, t. i., p. 129, as 
well as my Asie Centrale, t. i., p. 400 ; t. ii., p. 252. Procopius him- 
self says very definitely (Z?e Bello Goihico, iv., 5, ed. Bonn, 1833, vol. 
ii., p. 476), that the Goths were formerly called Scythians. Jacob 
Grimm, in his recently -published work, Ueber Jornandes, 1846, s. 21, 
has shown the identity of the Getae and the Goths. The opinion of Nie- 
buhr (see his Untersuchungen uher die Geten und Sarmaten, in his Kleine 
Historische und Philologische Schriflen, Ite Sammlung, 1828, s. 362, 
364, und 395), that the Scythians of Herodotus belong to the family of 
the Mongolian tribes, appears the less probable, since these tribes, 
partly under the yoke of the Chinese, and partly under that of the Ha- 
kas or Kirghis {XEpxig of Menander), still lived, far in the east of Asia, 
round Lake Baikal, in the beginning of the thirteenth century. He- 
rodotus distinguishes also the bald-headed Argippaeans (iv., 23) from the 
Scythians ; and if the first-named are characterized as " flat-nosed," 
they have, at the same time, a " long chin," which, according to' my 
jxperience, is by no means a physiognomical characteristic of the Cal 
mucs, or of other Mongolian races, but rather of the blonde (German 
izing?) Usun and Tingling, to whom the Chinese historians ascribe 
' long horse faces." 

X On the dwelling-place of the Arimaspes, and on the gold trad^ d 



PHYSICAL CONTEMPLATION OF THE UNIVERSE. 14? 

Griffins, the seat of the meteorological myth of the Hyperbo- 
reans,* which has wandered with Hercules far to the West. 
We may conjecture that the portion of Northern Asia above 
alluded to, which has again, in our days, become celebrated 
by the Siberian gold washings, as well as the large quantity 
of gold accumulated, in the time of Herodotus, by the Gothic 
tribe of the Massagetse, must have become an important source 
of wealth and luxury to the Greeks, by means of the inter- 
course opened with the Euxine. I place the locality of this 
source of wealth between the 53d and 55th degrees of latitude. 
The region of the gold-sand, of which the travelers were in- 
formed by the Daradas (Darder or Derder), mentioned in the 
Mahabharata, and in the fragments collected by Megasthenes 
and which, owing to the accidental double meanmg of the 
names of some animals,! has been associated with the often- 
Northwestern Asia in the time of Herodotus, see my Asie Centrale, t. 
i., p. 389-407. 

* " The story of the Hyperboreans is a meteorological myth. The 
wind of the mountains (B'Oreas) is believed to issue trom the Rhipean 
Mountains, while beyond these mountains there prevail a calm air and 
a genial climate, as on the Alpine summits, beyond the region of clouds. 
In this we trace the dawn of a physical science, which explains the 
distribution of heat and the difference of climates by local causes, by 
the direction of predominating winds, the vicinity of the sun, and the 
action of a saline or humid principle. The consequence of these sys- 
tematic ideas was the assumption of a certain independence supposed 
to exist between the climate and the latitude of the place ; thus the 
mythf of the Hyperboreans, connected by its oi-igin with the Dorian 
worship of Apollo, which was primitively Boreal, may have proceeded 
from the north toward the west, thus following Hercules in his prog- 
ress toward the sources of the Ister, to the island of Erythia, and to 
the gardens of the Hesperides. The Rhipes, or Rhipean Mountains, 
have also a meteorological meaning, as the word indicates. They are 
the mountains of impulsion, or of the glacial souffle {^itttj), the place 
from which the Boreal tempests are unloosened." — Asie Centrale, t. i., 
p. 392, 403. 

t In Hindostanee there are two words which might easily be con- 
founded, as Wilford has already remarked, one of which is tschiuntd, 
a kind of large black ant (whence the diminutive tschiunti, tschinti, the 
small common ant) ; the other ttchitd, a spotted panther, the little hunt- 
ing leopard (the Felis jubata, Schreb.). This word (tschitd) is the 
Sanscrit tschiira, variegated or spotted, as is shown by the Bengalee 
name for the animal {tschitdbdgh and tschitibdgh, from bdgh, Sanscrit 
wyaghra, tiger). — (Buschmann.) In the Mahabharata (ii., I860) there 
is a passage recently discovered, in which the ant-gold is mentioned. 
*' Wilso invenit {Journ. of the Asiat. Soc, vii., 1843, p. 143), mention- 
em fieri etiam in Indicis litteris bestiarum aurum effodientium, quas, 
quum terram eftbdiant, eodem nomine (pipilica) atque formicas Indi 
nuncupant." Compare Schwanbeck, in Megasth. Indicis, 1846, p. 73. 
It struck me to see that, in the basaltic districts of the Alexican high* 



148 COSMOS. 

repeated fable of the gigantic ants, is situated within a more 
southern latitude of 35^ or 37°. This region must, according 
to one of two combinations, be situated either in the Thibetian 
highlands east of the Bolor chain, between the Himalaya and 
Kuen-lun, west of Iskardo, or north of the latter mountain 
chain toward the desert of Gobi, which has likewise been de- 
scribed as an auriferous district by the accurate Chinese ob- 
server and traveler Hiuen-thsang, who lived at the beginning 
of the seventh century of our era. How much more accessi- 
ble must the gold of the Arimaspes and Massage tse have been 
to the traders in the Milesian colonies on the northern shores 
of the Euxine I I have alluded to these sources of wealth 
for the purpose of not ofnitting to mention a fact which may 
be regarded as an important and still active result of the open- 
ing of the Euxine, and of the first advance of the Greeks to- 
ward the East. 

The great event of the Doric migrations, and of the return 
of the Heraclidae into Peloponnesus, which was productive of 
such important changes, ialls about one hundred and fifty 
years after the demi-mythical expedition of the Argonauts, 
which is synonymous with the opening of the Euxine to Greek 
navigation and commercial intercourse. This navigation si- 
multaneously gave occasion to the founding of new states and 
new governments, and to the establishment of a colonial sys 
tem designating an important period in the life of the Hel- 
lenic races, and it has further been most influential in extend- 
ing the sphere of cosmical views, based upon intellectual cul- 
ture. Europe and Asia thus owed their more intimate con- 
nection to the establishment of the colonies, M^hich formed a 
continuous chain from Sinope (Dioscurias) and the Tauric 
Panticapseum to Saguntum and Cyrene, the latter of which 
was founded by the inhabitants of the rainless island of Thera. 

No nation of antiquity possessed more numerous, and, on 
the whole, more powerful colonial cities than the Greeks. It 
must, however, be remembered, that a period of four hundred 
cr five hundred years intervened between the establishment 
of the most ancient -^olian colonies, among which Mytilene 
and Smyrna were pre-eminently distinguished, and the founda- 
tion of Syracuse, Croton, and Cyrene. The Indians and Ma- 
layans made only weak attempts to found colonies on the east- 
ern coast of Africa, in Zokotora (Dioscorides), and in the South 
Asiatic Archipelago. Among the Phoenicians a highly-devel- 

lands, the ants bring together heaps of shining grains of hyalite, whicll 
X was able to collect out of their hillocks. 



PHYSICAL CONTEMPLATKN OP THE UNIVERSE. 149 

oped colonial system had been extended over a larger s^aco 
than that occupied by the Greeks, stretching, although with 
wide intervals between the stations, from the Persian Gulf to 
Cerne on the western coast of Africa. No mother country 
ever estabhshed a colony which was as powerful from conquests, 
and as famed for its commercial undertakings, as Carthage. 
But, notwithstanding this greatness, Carthage stood far below 
that degree of mental and artistical cultivation which has 
enabled the Greek colonial cities to transmit to us so many 
noble and lasting forms of art. 

It must not be forgotten that many populous Greek cities 
flourished simultaneously in Asia Minor, the ^gean Sea, 
Lower Italy, and Sicily ; and that, like Carthage, the coloni- 
al cities of Miletus and Massilia again founded other colonies , 
that Syracuse, when at the zenith of her power, fought against 
Athens, and the army of Hannibal and Hamilkar ; and that 
Miletus was, for a long time, the first commercial city in the 
world after Tyre and Carthage. While a life so rich in en- 
terprise was being developed externally by the activity of a 
people whose internal condition was frequently exposed to 
violent agitations, new germs of national intellectual develop- 
ment were continually called forth with the increase of pros 
perity and the transmission to other nations of native cultiva 
tion. One common language and religion bound together the 
most distant members of the whole body, and it was by this 
union that the small parent country was brought within the 
wider circle embraced by the life of other nations. Foreign 
elements were incorporated in the Hellenic world, without, on 
that account, depriving it of any portion of its great and char- 
acteristic independence. The influence of contact with the 
East, and with Egypt before it had been connected with Per- 
sia, and above one hundred years before the irruption of Cam- 
byses, was, no doubt, from its very nature, more permanent 
than the influence of the colonies of Cecrops from Sais, of 
Cadmus from Phoenicia, and of Danaus and Chemmis, whose 
existence has so often been contested, and is, at any rate, 
wrapped in the deepest obscurity. 

The characteristics by which the Greek colonies differed so 
widely from all others, especially from the less flexible PhoB- 
nicians, and which affected the whole organization of theijr 
system, arose from the individuality and the primitive dif- 
ferences existing in the tribes which constituted the whole 
mother country, and thus gave occasion to a mixture of con- 
ue(5ting and separating forces in the colonies as well as Id 



150 COSMOS. 

Greece itself. These contrasts occasioned diversities in the 
direction of ideas and feelings, and -in the form of poetry and 
harmonious art, and created a rich fullness of life, in which 
all the apparently hostile elements were dissolved, according 
to a higher law of universal order, into a gentle harmonious 
unison. 

Notwithstanding that Miletus, Ephesus, and Colophon were 
Ionic; Cos, ]'»hodes, and Halicarnassus Doric; and Croton 
and Sybaris Achaic, the power and the inspired poetry of the 
Homeric song every where made their power appreciable in 
the midst of this diversity of cultivation, and even in Lower 
Italy, in the many contiguous colonial cities founded by differ- 
ent races. Amid the most firmly- rooted contrasts in man- 
ners and political institutions, and notwithstanding the fluc- 
tuations to which the latter were subject, Greece retained its 
nationality unbroken, and the wide domain of ideal and art- 
istic creations achieved by the separate tribes was regarded as 
the common property of the whole nation. 

It still remains for me to mention, in the present section, 
the third point, which we have already indicated as having, 
conjointly with the opening of the Euxine, and the establish- 
ment of colonies on the basin of the Mediterranean, exercised 
60 marked an influence on the history of the contemplation of 
the universe. The foundation of Tartessus and Gades, where 
a temple was dedicated to the wandering divinity Melkart (a 
son of Baal), and of the colonial city of Utica, which was older 
than Carthage, remind us that the Phoenicians had already 
navigated the open sea for many centuries before the Greeks 
passed beyond the straits termed by Pindar the " Gadeirian 
Gate."* In the same manner as the Milesians in the East, 
by the way of the Euxine,t established relations of interna- 
tional contact which laid the foundation of an inland trade 

* Strabo, lib. iii., p. 172 (Bockh, Find. Fragm., v., 155). The expe- 
dition of Colaeus of Samos falls, according to Otfr. Miiller {Prolegomena 
zu einer wissenschaftlichen Mythologie), in Olymp. 31, and according to 
Letronne's investigation {Essai sur les Idies Cosmographiques qui se rat- 
tachent au nom d' Atlas, p. 9), in Olymp. 35, 1, or in the year 640. The 
epoch depends, however, on the f.iundation of Cyrene, which is placed 
by Otfr. MtiUer between Olymp. 35 and 37 {Minyer, s. 344, Prolegome- 
na, 8. 63) ; for in the time of Coitus (Herod., iv., 152), the way from 
Thera to Libya was not as yet known. Zurapt places the fouudatiou 
of Carthage in 878, and that of Gades in 1100 B.C. 

t According to the maimer of the ancients (Strabo, lib. ii., p. 126), I 
reckon the whole Euxine, together with the Masotis (as required by 
physical and geological views), to be included vn the coirmon basin oA 
the great " Inner »»» " 



PHYSICAL CONTEMPLATION OF THE UNIVERSE. 15| 

fetwjen the north of Europe and Asia, and subsequently with 
the Oxus and Indus, so the Samians* and Phocceanst were 
the first among the Greeks who endeavored to penetrate from 
tlie basin of the Mediterranean toward the west. 

Coiseus of Samos sailed for Egypt, where, at that time, an 
intercourse had begun, under Psammitichus, with the Greeks, 
which probably was only the renewal of a former connection. 
He was driven by easterly stnrms to the island of Platsea, and 
from thence Herodotus significantly adds, " not without divine 
direction," through the straits into the ocean. The accident- 
al and unexpected commercial gain in Iberian Tartessus con- 
duced less than the discovery of an entrance into an unknown 
world (whose existence was scarcely conjectured as a mythical 
creation of fancy) toward giving to this event importance and 
celebrity wherever the Greek language was understood on the 
shores of the Mediterranean. Beyond the Pillars of Hercules 
(earlier known as the Pillars of Briareus, of ^gseon, and of 
Cronos), at the western margin of the earth, on the road to 
Elysium and the Hesperides, the primeval waters of the cir- 
cling Oceanus$ were first seen, in which the source of all riv- 
ers was then sought. 

At Phasis the navigators of the Euxine again found them- 
selves on a coast beyond which a S'U7i Lake was supposed to 
be situated, ana south of Gadeira and Tartessus their eyes for 
the first time ranged over a boundless waste of waters. It 
was this circumstance which, for fifteen hundred years, gave 
to the gate of the inner sea a peculiar character of import- 
ance. Ever striving to pass onward, PhoBnicians, Greeks, 
Arabs, Catalans, Majorcans, Frenchmen from Dieppe and La 
Rochelle, Genoese, Venetians, Portuguese, and Spaniards in 
turn attempted to advance across the Atlantic Ocean, long 
held to be a miry, shallow, dark, and misty sea, Mare iene- 
hrosum ; until, proceeding from station to station, as it were, 
these southern nations, after gaining the Canaries and the 

* Herod., iv., 152. 

t Herod,, i., 163, where even the discovery of Tartessus is ascribec 
to the Phocreans ; but the commercial enterprise of the Phocaeans was 
seventy years after the time of CoIseus of Samos, according to Ukert 
Geogr. der Oriechen und Romer, th. 1, i., s. 40). 

X According to a fragment of Fhavorinus, uKtavog (and therefor© 
'jyfiv also) are not Greek words, but merely borrowed from the barba- 
rians (Spohn, De Nlcephor. Blemm. duohus Opvsculit, 1818, p. 23). My 
brother was of opinion that they were connected with the Sanscrit roota 
9gka and ogh. (See my Examen Critique de V Hist, de la O6ogr., t. i , 
p 32 and 182.) 



153 COSMOS. 

Azores, finally came to the New Continent, which, however, 
had ah'eady been reached by the Northmen at an earher pe- 
riod and from a different direction. 

While Alexander was opening the far East, the great Stag- 
irite* was led, by a consideration of the form of the earth, to 
conceive the idea of the proximity of India to the Pillars of 
Hercules ; while Strabo had even conjectured that there might 
be " many other habitable tracts of landf in the northern 
hemisphere, perhaps in the parallel which passes through 
those Pillars, the island of Rhodes and Thin£B, between the 
coasts of Western Europe and Eastern Asia." The hypothe- 
sis of the locality of such lands, in the prolongation of the 
major axis of the Mediterranean, was connected with a grand 
geographical view of Eratosthenes, current in antiquity, and 
in accordance with which the whole of the Old Continent, in 
its widest extension from west to east, and nearly in the thir- 
ty-sixth degree of latitude, was supposed to present an almost 
continuous line of elevation.^ 

The expedition of Colseus of Samos does not, however, alone 
indicate an epoch in which the Hellenic races, and the na- 
tions to whom their cultivation was transmitted, developed 
new views that led to the extension of maritime expeditions, 
but it also immediately enlarged the sphere of ideas. The 
great natural phenomenon which, by the periodic elevation of 
the level of the sea, exhibits the connection existing between 
the earth, and the sun, and moon, now first permanently ar- 
rested the attention of men. In the African Syrtic Sea this 
phenomenon had appeared to the Greeks to be accidental, and 
had not unfrequently been attended by danger. Posidonius, 
who had observed the ebb and flow of the sea at Ilipa and 

* Aristot., De Casio, ii., 14 (p. 298, b., Bekk.); Meteor., ii., 5 (p. 362, 
Bekk.). Compare my Examen Critique, t. i., p. 125-130. Seneca ven- 
tures to say {Nat. Qucest., in praefat., 11), *' Contemnet curiosus spec- 
tator domicilii (terne) angustias. Quantum enim est quod ab ultimis 
littoribus Hispaniae usque ad Indos jacet ? Paucissimorum dierura 
Bpatium, si navem suus ventus implevit." {Examen Critique, t. i., p. 
158.) 

t Strabo, lib. i., p. 65 and 118, Casaub. {Examen Critique, t. i., p. 
152.) 

t In the Diaphragma of Dicaearchus, by which the earth is divided, 
the elevation passes through the Taurus, the chains of Deraavend and 
Hindoo-Coosh, the Northern Thibetian Kuen-lun, and the rirountaius of 
the Chinese provinces Sse-tschuan and Kuang-si, which are perpetually 
covered with snow.- See my orographical researches on those* lines of 
elevation in my Asie Centrale, t. i., p. 104-114, 118-164; t. ii., p 4.13 
and 438. 



INFLUENCE OF THE MACEDONIAN CAMPAIGNS. 153 

Gadeira, compared his observations with the facts of which he 
was informed by the experienced Phcenicians concerning the 
influence supposed- to be exercised by the moon * 



EXPEDITIONS OF THE MACEDONIANS UNDER ALEXANDER THE GREAT. 
—CHANGES IN THE RELATIONS OF THE WORLD.— FUSION OF THE 
WEST WITH THE EAST.— THE GREEKS PROMOTE THE INTERMIX- 
TURE OF RACES FROM THE NILE TO THE EUPHRATES, THE JAX- 
ARTES, AND THE INDUS.— SUDDEN EXTENSION OF COSMICAL VIEWS, 
BOTH BY MEANS OF DIRECT OBSERVATION OF NATURE, AND BY THE 
RECIPROCAL INTERCOURSE OF ANCIENT CIVILIZED AND INDUSTRIAL 
NATIONS. 

The campaigns of the Macedonians under Alexander the 
Great, the downfall of the Persian dominion, the rising inter- 
course with Western India, and the action of the Grseco-Bac- 
trian empire, which continued to prevail for one hundred and 
sixteen years, may be regarded as among the most important 
social epochs in the process of the development df the history 
of mankind, as far as it indicates a closer connection of South- 
ern Europe with the southwest of Asia, the Nile, and Libya. 
Independently of the almost immeasurable extension opened 
to the sphere of development by the advance of the Macedo- 
nians, their campaigns acquired a character of profound moral 
greatness by the incessant efforts of the conqueror to amalga- 
mate all races, and to establish, under the noble influence of 
Hellenism, a unity throughout the world. t The foundation 
of many new cities at points, the selection of which indicates 
higher aims, the arrangement and classification of an inde- 
pendently responsible form of government for these cities, and 
the tender forbearance evinced by Alexander for national cus- 
toms and national forms of worship, all testify that the plan 
of one great and organic whole had been laid. That which 
was perhaps originally foreign to a scheme of this kind devel- 
oped itself subsequently from the nature of the relations, as is 
always the case under the influence of comprehensive events. 
If we remember that only fifty-two Olympiads intervened 
from the battle of the Granicus to the destructive irruption 
into Bactria of the Saca) and Tochi, we shall be astonished 
at the permanence and the magical influence exercised by the 

* Strabo, lib. iii., p. 173 {Examen Crit., t. iii., p. 98). 

t Droysen, Gescli. Alexanders des Grossen, s. 544 ; the same in hia 
Oesch. der Bildung des Hellenistischen Staatensy stems, s. 23-34, 588* 
W2&gt; ■/48-755. 

G 2 



154 COSMOS. 

introduction from the west of Hellenic cultivation. This cul- 
tivation, blended with the knowledge of the Arabians, the mod- 
ern Persians and Indians, extended its influence in so great a 
degree even to the time of the Middle Ages, that it is often 
difficult to determine the elements which are due to Greek 
iiteratuie, and those which have originated, independently of 
all admixture, from the inventive spirit of the Asiatic races. 

The principle of unity, or, rather, the feeling of the benefi- 
cent poliiical influence incorporated in this principle, was deep- 
ly implanted in the breast of the great conqueror, as is testified 
by all the arrangements of his polity ; and its application to 
Greece itself was a subject that had already early been incul- 
cated upon him by his great teacher. In the Politica of Ari&amp; 
totle we read as follows :* •' The Asiatic nations are not de- 
ficient in activity of mind and artistic ingenuity, yet they live 
in subjection and servitude without evincing the courage nec- 
essary for- resistance, while the Greeks, valiant and energetic, 
living in freedom, and, therefore, well governed, might, if they 
ivere united into one state, exercise dominion over all barba- 
rians.^' Thus wrote the Stagirite during his second stay at 
Athens,t before Alexander had passed the Granicus. These 
dogmas of the philosopher, however cor^rary to nature he 
may have professed to consider an unlimited dominion (the 
TxantaoLAeia), no doubt made a more vivid impression on the 
conqueror than the fantastic narrations of Ctesias respecting 
India, to which August Wilhelm von Schlegel, ai|d, prior to 
him, Ste. Croix, ascribed so important an influence. $ 

In the preceding pages we have attempted to give a brief 
delineation of the sea as a means of furthering international 
contact and union, and of the influence exercised in this re- 
spect by the extended navigation of the Phoenicians, Cartha- 
ginians, Tyrrhenians, and Etruscans. We have further shown 
how the Greeks, whose maritime power was strengthened by 
numerous colonies, endeavored to penetrate beyond the basin 
of the Mediterranean toward the east and the west by the 
Argonautic expedition from lolcus, and by the voyage of Co- 
laeus of Samos ; and, lastly, how the fleet of Solomon and 
Hiram visited distant gold lands in their voyages to Ophir 
through the Red Sea. The present section will lead us to the 

* Aristot., Polit., vii., 7, p. 13-27, Bekker. (Compare, also, iii., 16, 
and the remarkable passage of Eratosthenes in Strabo, lib. i., p. 66 and 
97, Casaiib.) t Stahr, Aristoielia, th. ii., s. 114. 

t Ste. Croix, Examen Critique des Historiens (V Alexandre, p 731. 
(Schlegel, Ind. Bibliothek, bd. i., b. \bQ.\ 



INFLUENCK OF THE MACEDONIAN CAMPAIGNS. 155 

iHcorior of a great continent, through different routes opened 
to inland trade and river navigation. In the short period of 
twelve years are compressed the campaigns in Western Asia 
and Syria, with the battles of the Granicus, and the passes of 
Issus ; the taking of Tyre, and the easy conquest of Egypt ; 
the Persico- Babylonian campaign, when the dominion of the 
Achasmenidae was annihilated at Arbela, in the plain of Gau- 
gamela ; the expedition to Bactria and Sogdiana, between the 
Hindoo-Coosh and the Jaxartes (Syr) ; and, lastly, the bold 
advance into the country of the five rivers, the Pentapotamia 
of Western India. Alexander founded Greek colonies almost 
every where, and diffused Greek manners and customs over 
the vast tracts of land that extend from the Temple of Am- 
nion in the Libyan Oasis, and from Alexandria on the West- 
ern Delta of the Nile to Alexandria on the Jaxartes, the pres- 
ent Khodjend in Fergana. 

The extension of the sphere of new ideas — and this is the 
point of view from which the Macedonian expeditions and the 
prolonged duration of the Bactrian empire must be considered 
— was owing to the magnitude of the space made known, and 
to the variety of climates manifested from Cyropolis on the 
Jaxartes (in the latitude of Tiflis and Rome) to the eastern 
delta of the Indus at Tira, under the tropic of Cancer. To 
these we may further add the wonderful diversity in the con- 
figuration of the country, which alternated in luxurious and 
fruitful districts, in arid plains and snow-crowned mountain 
ranges ; the novelty and gigantic size of animal and vegetable 
forms ; the aspect and geographical distribution of races of 
men of various color ; the actual contact with Oriental na- 
tions in some respects so highly gifted and enjoying a civiliza- 
tion of almost primitive antiquity, and an acquaintance with* 
their religious myths, systems of philosophy, astronomical 
knowledge, and astrological phantasies. In no age, except- 
ing only the epoch of the discovery and opening of tropical 
America, eighteen centuries and a half later, has there been 
revealed, at one time and to one race, a richer field of new 
views of nature, or a greater mass of materials for laying the 
foundation of a physical knowledge of the earth, and of com- 
parative ethnological science. The vividness of the impres- 
sion thus produced is testified by the whole literature of the 
West, and is also manifested by the doubts — such as accom 
pany, in all cases, an appeal to the imagination in the descrip- 
tion of natural scenery — which were excited in Greek, and 
subsequently in Roman writers, by the narrations of Megaa- 



156 COSMOS. 

thenes, Nearchus, Aristob.tlus, and other companions of Alex- 
ander's campaigns. These narrators, influenced by the tone 
of feehng characteristic of their age, and closely connecting 
together facts and individual opinions, have experienced the 
varying fate of all travelers, meeting at first with bitter ani- 
madversion, and subsequently with a milder judgment. The 
latter has been more frequent in our own day, since a more pro- 
found study of Sanscrit, a more general knowledge' of geo- 
graphical names, the discovery of Bactrian coins in Topes, 
and, above all, an actual acquaintance with the country and 
its organic productions, have placed more correct elements of 
information at the disposal of the critic than those yielded to 
the partial knowledge of the caviling Eratosthenes, or of Strabo 
and Phny.* 

If we compare, according to differences in longitude, the 
length of the Mediterranean with the distance from west to 
east which separates Asia Minor from the shores of the Hypha- 
sis (Beas), from the Altars of Return, Ave shall perceive that 

* Compare Schwanbeck, ^'Defide Megasthenis et pretio,'" in his edi- 
tion of that writer, p. 59-77. Megasthenes frequently visited Pahbo- 
thra, the court of the King of Magadha. He was deeply initiated in 
the study of Indian chronology, and relates " how, in past times, the 
All had three times come to freedom ; how three ages of the world had 
run their course, and how the fourth had begun in his own time" (Las- 
sen, Indiscke Alterthumskunde, bd. i., s. 510). Hesiod's doctrine of four 
ages of the world, as connected with four great elementary destruc- 
tions, which together embrace a period of 18,028 years, is also to be 
met with among the Mexicans. (Humboldt, Vues des Cordilleres et 
Monumens des Peuples indigenes de V Amirique, t. ii., p. 119-129.) A 
remarkable proof of the exactness of Megasthenes has been discovered 
in modern times by the study of the Rigveda and of the Mahabharata. 
Consult what Megasthenes relates concerning " the land of the long^ 
living blessed beings" in the most northern parts of India — the land c. 
Uttarakuru (probably north of Kashmeer, toward Belurtagh), which; 
according to his Greek views, he associates with the supposed " thou- 
sand years of the life of the Hyperboreans." (Lassen, in the Zeitschrift 
fur die Kunde des Morg^nlandes, bd. ii., s. 62.) A tradition mentioned 
by Ctesias (who has been too long esteemed below his merits), of a 
sacred place in the northern desert, may be noticed in connection with 
this point. {Ind., cap. viii., ed. Baehr, p. 249 and 285.) The marti- 
choras mentioned by Aristotle {Hist, de Animal., ii., 3, § 10; t. i., p. 
51, Schneider), the griffin half eagle and half lion, the kartazonon no. 
ticed by jElian, and a one-homed wild ass, are certainly spoken of by 
Ctesias as real animals ; they were not, however, the creations of his 
inventive fancy, for he mistook, as Heeren and Cuvier have remarked, 
the pictured forms of symbolical animals, seen on Persian monuments, 
for representations of strange beasts still living in the remote parts oif 
India. There is, however, as Guigniaut has well observed, much diffi 
culty in identifying the martichoras with Persepolitan symbols. (Creu 
«er, Religions de I'Antiquifi: Notes et Eclaircissements, p. 720.) 



INFLUENCE OF THE MACEDONIAN CAMPAIGNS. IS*"/ 

the geographical knowledge of the Greeks was doubled in (!x- 
tent in the course of a few years. In order to define more 
accurately that which we have termed the mass of materials 
added to the sciences of natural philosophy and physical geog- 
raphy by the difierent campaigns and by the colonial institu- 
tions of Alexander, I would first refer to the diversity in the 
form of the earth's crust, which has, however, only been more 
specially made known to us by the experiments and researches 
of recent times. In the countries through which he passed, 
low lands, deserts, and salt steppes devoid of vegetation (as on 
the north of the Asferah chain, which is a continuation of the 
Thian-schan, and the four large cultivated alluvial districts 
of the Euphrates, the Indus, Oxus, and Jaxartes), contrasted 
with snow-clad mountains, having an elevation of nearly 
20,000 feet. The Hindoo-Coosh, or Indian Caucasus of the 
Macedonians, which is a continuation of the North Thibetiar 
Kuen-lun, west of the south transverse chain of Bolor, is di- 
vided in its prolongation toward Herat into two great chains 
bounding Kafiristan,* the southern of which is the loftier of 
the two. Alexander passed over the plateau of Bamian, 
which lies at an elevation of about 8500 feet, and in which 
men supposed they had found the cave of Prometheus,! to the 
crest of the Kohibaba, and beyond Kabura along the Choes, 
crossing the Indus somewhat to the north of the present At- 
tok. A comparison between the low Tauric chain, Avith 
which the Greeks were familiar, and the eternal snow sur- 
mounting the range of the Hindoo-Coosh, and which, accord- 
ing to Burnes, begins at an elevation of 13,000 feet, must 
have given occasion to a recognition, on a more colossal scale, 
of the superposition of difierent zones of climate and vegeta- 
tion. In active minds direct contact with the elementary 
world produces the most vivid impression on the senses. And 
thus we find that Strabo has described, in the most perfectly 
truthful characters, the passage across the mountainous dis- 
trict of the Paropanisadae, where the army with difficulty 
cleared a passage through the snow, and where arborescent 
vegetation had ceased. $ 

* I have cbnsidered these intricate orographical relations in ray Atie 
Centrale, t. ii., p. 429-434. 

t Lassen, in the Zeitschrift fur die Kunde des Morgenl., bd. i., s. 230. 

X The country between Bamian and Ghori. See Carl Zimmer- 
mann's excellent orographical work Uehorsichtsblatt von Afghanistan, 
1842. (Compare Strabo, lib. xv., p. 725 ; Diod. Sicul., xvii., 82 ; Menn, 
Meletem. Hist., 1839, p. 25 and 31; Ritter, Ueber Alexanders Feldzug 
am Indischen Kaukasus, in the Abhandl. der Berl. Akad. of the year 



158 COSMOS. 

More certain knowledge was now transmitted to the West 
from the Macedonian colonies respecting those Indian products 
of nature and art which had hitherto been only imperfectly 
known from commercial intercourse, or from the narrations 
of Ctesias of Cnidus, who lived seventeen years at the court 
of Persia as physician to Artaxerxes Mnemon. Among the 
objects thus made known we must reckon irrigated rice-fields, 
for whose cultivation Aristobulus gives special directions ; the 
ootton-tree, and the fine tissues and the paper for which it* 
furnished the materials ; spices and opium ; wine made from 
rice and the juice of palms, whose Sanscrit name of tala has 
been preserved in the works of Arrian ;t sugar from the sugar- 
cane,! which is certainly often confounded in the Greek and 
Roman writers with the tabaschir of the bamboo reed ; wool 
from the great Bombax-tree ;§ shawls made of the Thibetian 
goat's hair; silken (Seric) tissues ;|| oil from the white sesa- 
mum (Sanscrit tila) ; attar of roses and other perfumes ; lac 
(Sanscrit Idkschd, in the vulgar tongue lakkha) ;*}[ and, last- 
ly, the hardened Indian wutz-steel. 

Besides the knowledge of these products, which soon be- 
came objects of universal commerce, and many of which were 
transported by the Sekucidse to Arabia,** the aspect of a rich- 

1829, 8. 150; Droyseii, Bildung des Hellenist. Staatensystems, s. 614.) 
I write Paropauisus, as it occurs in all the good codices of Ptolemy, 
and not Paropamisus. I have explained the reasons in my Asie Centrale, 
t. i., p. 114-118. (See, also, Lassen, zur Gesch. der Griechischen und 
Indoskythischen Konige, s. 128). * Strabo, lib. xv., p. 717, Casaub. 

t Tala, the name of the palm Borassus flabelliformis, which is very 
characteristically termed by Amarasinha " a king of the grasses." Ar- 
rian, Ind., vii., 3. 

X The word tabaschir is deduced from the Sanscrit tvakkschird (bark 
milk). In 1817, in the historical additions to my work De distribn- 
iione Geographicd Plantarum, secundum cckH, temperiem et altitudinem 
Montinm, p. 215, I drew attention to the fact that the companions of 
Alexander learned to know the true sugar of the sugar-cane of the In- 
dians as well as the tabaschir of the bamboo. (Strabo, lib. xv., p. 693 ; 
Peripl. Maris Erythr., p. 9.) Moses of Chorene, who lived in the mid- 
dle of the fifth century, was the first (G^eog'r., ed. Whiston, 1736, p. 364) 
who circumstantially described the preparation of sugar from the juice 
of the Saccharum officinarum, in the province of Chorasan. 

$ Strabo, lib. xv., p. 694. 

11 Ritter, Erdkunde von Asien, bd. iv., 1, s. 437; bd. vi., 1, s. 698; 
Lassen, Ind. Alterthumskunde, bd. i., s. 317-323. The passage in Aris- 
totle's Hist, di Animal., v. 17 (t. i., p. 209, ed. Schneider), relating to 
the web of a great horned caterpillar, refers to the island of Cos. 

^ Thus Xa/c/cof ;^pwyudrtvof in the Peripl. Maris Erythr., p. 5 (Las 
gen, s. 316). 

** Plin., Hist. Nat., xvi., 32. (On the introduction of rare Asiatic 
plants into Egypt by *.he Ptolemies, see Pliny, xii., 14 and 17.) 



INFLUENCE OF THE MACEDONIAN CAMPAIGNS. 159 

iy-embellislied tropical nature speedily yielded the Gieeks en- 
joyments 01 another kind. The gigantic forms of hitherto 
unknown animals and plants filled their imaginations with 
the most exciting images. Writers, whose diy scientific style 
is usually devoid of all animation, became poetic when they 
described the characteristics of animals, as, for instance, ele- 
phants ; or when they spoke of the height of trees, whose 
summits can not be reached by the arrow in its flight, and 
whose leaves are larger than the shields of the infantry ; of* 
" the bamboo, a light, feathery, tree-like grass," " each of 
whose jointed parts (internodia) may serve for a many-oared 
keel ;" or of the Irtiian fig-tree, that takes root by its branches, 
and whose stem has a diameter of twenty-eight feet, and 
which, as Onesicritus remarked, with much truth to nature, 
forms " a leafy canopy similar to a tent, supported by numer- 
ous pillars." The tall, arborescent ferns, which, according 
to my opinion, constitute the greatest ornament of tropical 
scenery, are never mentioned by Alexander's companions,* al- 
though they speak of the noble, fan-like umbrella palm, and 
the delicate and ever-fresh green of the cultivated banana.t 

The knowledge of a great portion of the earth may now be 
said to have been opened for the first time. The objective 
world began to assume a preponderating force oyer that of 
mere subjective creation ; and while the fruitful seeds yielded 
by the language and literature of the Greeks were scattered 

* Humboldt, De distrib. Geogr. Plantarum, p. 178. 

t I have often correspoiided, since the year 1827, with Lassen on the 
remarkable passage in Phny, xii., 6 : " Major aha (arbor") pomo et su- 
avitate praicelle^itior, quo sapienies Indorum vivunt. Folium alas avi- 
um imitatur, longitudine trium cubitorum, latitudine duflm. Fi'uctum 
cortice mittit, admirabilem succi dulcedine ut uno quaternos satiet. 
Arbori nomen palee, pomo arience.^' The following is the result of my 
learned friend's investigation: " Amarasinha places the banana {mnsa, 
pisang) at the head of all nutritive plants. Among the many Sanscrit 
names which he adduces are varanahuscha, bhanuphala (sun fruit), and 
moito, whence the Arabic mauza. Phqla {pala) is fruit in general, and 
it is therefore only by a misunderstanding that it has been taken for the 
name of the plant. In Sanscrit, varana without buscJia is not used as 
the name of the banana, although the abbreviation may have been 
characteristic of the popular language. Varana would be in Greek 
ovapeva, which is. certainly not very far removed from ariena." (Com- 
pare Lassen, Ind. AUerthumsknnde, bd. i., p. 262; my Essai Politique 
tur la Nouv. Espagne, t. ii., 1827, p. 382 ; and Relat. Hist., t. i. p. 491.) 
The chemical connection of the nourishing amylum with sugar was de- 
tected both by Prosper Alpinus and Abd-Allatif, and they sought to ex 
plain the ongin of the banana by the insertion of the sugar-cane, oi th&lt;i 
nweet date fru.t, into the root of the colocasia (Abd-Allatif, Relation dl 
Vji^'y^He, trad, par Silvestre de Sacy, p. i\S and 105). 



160 COSMOS. 

abroad hy the conquests of Alexander, scientific observation 
and the systematic arrangement of the knowledge already ac- 
quired were elucidated by the doctrines and expositions of 
Aristotle.* We here indicate a happy coincidence of favoring 
relations, for, at the very period when a vast amount of new 
materials was revealed to the human mind, their intellectual 
conception was at once facilitated and multiplied through the 
direction given by the Stagirite to the empirical investigation 
jof facts in the domain of nature, to the profound consideration 
of speculative hypothesis, and to the development of a lan- 
guage of science based on strict definition. Thus Aristotle 
must still remain, for thousands of years ^ come, as Dante 
has gracefully termed him, 

" II maestro di color eke sanno."\ 

The belief in the direct enrichment of Aristotle's zoological 
knowledge by means of the Macedonian campaigns has, how- 
ever, either wholly disappeared, or, at any rate, been rendered 
extremely uncertain by recent and more carefully-conducted 
researches. The wretched compilation of a life of the Stag- 
irite, which was long ascribed to Ammonius, the son of Her- 
mias, had contributed to the diffusion of many erroneous 
views, and, among others, to the belief that| the philosopher 
accompanied his pupil as far, at least, as the shores of the 
Nile.§ The great work on Animals appears to have been 
written only a short time after the Meteorologica, the date 
of which would seem, from internal evidence, II to fall in the 

* Compare, on this epoch, Wilhelm von Humboldt's work, Ueber 
die Kawi-Spracke iind die Versckiedenheit des menscklic^en Sprachbai/ts, 
bd. i., s. ccl. und ccliv. ; Droysen, Gesck. Alexanders des Gr., s. 547 ; and 
Hellenist. Staaten system, s. 24. t Dante, Inf., iv., 130. 

X Compare Cuvier's assertions in the Biographie Universelle, t. ii , 
1811, p. 458 (and unfortunately again repeated in the edition of 1843, 
t. ii., p. 219), with Stahr's Aristotelia, th. i., s. 15 und 108. 

$ Cuvier, when he was engaged on the Life of Aristotle, inclined to 
the belief of the philosopher having accompanied Alexander to Egypt, 
" whence," he says, " the Stagfrite must have brought back to Athens 
(Olymp. 112, 2) all the materials for the Historia Animalinm." Subse- 
quently (1830) the distinguished French naturalist abandoned this opin 
ion, because, after a more careful examination, he remarked " that the 
descriptions of Egyptian animals were not sketched from life, but from 
notices by Herodotus." (See, also, Cuvier, Histoire des Sciences Nai- 
urelles, publiee par Magdeleine de Saint Agy, t. i., 1841, p. 136.) 

II To these internal indications belong the statement of the perfect 
insulation of the Caspian Sea ; the notice of the great comet, which ap. 
peared under Nicomachus when holding the office of archon, Olymp. 
109, 4 (according to Corsini), and which is not to be confounded with 
that which Von Bo guslawski has lately named the comet of Aristotle 



INFLUENCE OP THE MACEDONIAN CAMPAIGNS. 161 

106th, or, at the latest, in the 111th Olympiad, and, there- 
fore, either fourteen years befoie Aristotle came to the court 
of Philip, or, at the furthest, three years before the passage 
across the Granicus. It must, however, be admitted, that 
some few facts may be advanced as evidence against this as 
sumption of an early completion of the nine books of Arista- 
tie's History of Animals, Among these must be reckoned the 
accurate knowledge possessed by Aristotle of the elephant, the 
bearded horse-stag (hippelaphus), the Bactrian two-humped 
camel, the hippardion, supposed to be the hunting-tiger (gue- 
pard), and the Indian buffalo, which does not appear to have 
been introduced into Europe before the time of the Crusades. 
But here it must be remarked that the native place of this 
large and singular stag, having a horse's mane, which Diard 
and Duvancel sent from Eastern India to Cuvier, who gave 
to it the name of Cervus Aristotelis, is, according to Aristo- 
tle's own account, not the Indian Pentapotamia traversed by 
Alexander, but Arachosia, west of Candahar, which, together 
with Gedrosia, constituted one satrapy of ancient Persia.* 

(under the Archoti Asteus, Olymp. 101, 4 ; Aristot, Meteor., lib. i., cap. 
6, 10; vol. i., p. 395, Ideler ; and which is probably identical with the 
comets of 1695 and 1843 ?) ; and, lastly, the mention of the destruction 
of the temple at Ephesus, as well as of a lunar rainbow, seen on two 
occasions in the course of fifty years. (Compare Schneider, ad Aristot., 
Hist, de Animalibus, vol. i., p. xl., xlii., ciii., and exx. ; Ideler, ad Aris- 
tot. Meteor., vol. i., p. x. ; and Humboldt, Asie Cent., t. ii., p. 168.) V/e 
know that the Historia Animalium " was written later than the Meteor- 
clogica,^^ from the fact that allusion is made in the last-named work 
to the former as to a work about to follow {Meteor., i., 1, 3, and iv. 
12, 13). 

* The five animals named in the text, and especially the hippelaphus 
(horse-stag with a long mane), the hippardion, the Bactrian camel, and 
the buffalo, are instanced by Cuvier as proofs of the later composition 
of Aristotle's Historia Animalium {Hist, des Sciences Nat., t. i., p. 154). 
Cuvier, in the fourth volume of his admirable Recherches sur les Osse- 
mens Fossiles, 1823, p. 40-43 and 502, distinguishes between two Asiatic 
stags with manes, which he calls Cervus hippelaphus and Cervus Aris- 
totelis. He oi-iginally regarded the first-named, of which he had seen 
a living specimen in London, and of which Diard had sent him skins 
and antlers from Sumatra, as Aristotle's hippelaphus from Amchosia 
{Hist, de Animal.fW., 2, $ 3, and 4, t. i., p. 43, 44, Schneider); but he 
afterward thought that a stag's head, sent to him from Bengal by Du. 
vaucel, agreed still better, according to the drawing of the entire large 
animal, with the Stagirite's description of the hippelaphus. This stag, 
which is indigenous in the mountains of Sylhe't in Bengal, in Nepaul, 
and in the country east of the Indus, next received the name of Cervuj 
Aristotelis. If, in the same chapter in which Aristotle speaks generally 
of animals with manes, the horse-stag (Equicervus), and the Indiar 
guepard, or hunting tiger (Felis jubata), are both understood, Sclineido 



162 COSMOS. 

May not the knowledge of the form and habits of the animal? 
above referred to, and which, for the most part, was comprised 
in short notices, have been transmitted to Aristotle, independ- 
ently of the Macedonian campaigns, either from Persia or from 
Babylon, which was the seat of a widely-extended foreign com- 
mercial intercourse ? Owing to the utter ignorance that pre- 
vailed at this time of the preparation of alcohol,* nothing but 

(t. iii., p. 66) considers the reading Trupdiov preferable to that of rd 
iTnTupdiov. The latter reading would be best interpreted to mean the 
giratie, as Pallas also conjectures (Spicileg. Zool., fasc. i., p. 4). If Aiis- 
totle had himself seen the guepard, and not merely heard it descx'ibed, 
how could he have failed to notice non-retractile claws in a feline ani- 
mal ? It is also surprising that Aristotle, who is always so accurate, if, 
as August VVilhelm von Schlegel maintains, he had a menagerie near 
his residence at Athens, and had himself dissected one of the elephants 
taken at Arbela, should have failed to describe the small opening near 
the temples of the animal, where, at the rutting season, a strong-smell- 
ing fluid is secreted, often alluded to by the Indian poets. (Schlegel's 
Indische Bibliothek, bd. i., s. 163-166.) I notice this apparently trifling 
circumstance thus particularly, because the above-mentioned small aper 
ture was made known to us from the accounts of Megasthenes, to whom, 
nevertheless, no one would be led to ascribe anatomical knowledge. 
(Strabo, lib. xv., p. 704 and 705, Casaub.) I find nothing in the differ- 
ent zoological works of Aristotle which have come down to us that nec- 
essarily implies his having had the opportunity of making direct ob- 
servations on elephants, or of his having dissected any. Although it is 
most probable that the Historia Animalium was completed before Alex- 
ander's campaigns in Asia Minor, there is undoubtedly a possibility that 
the work may, as Stahr supposes {Aristotelia, th. ii., s. 98), have con- 
nnued to receive additions until the end of the author's life, Olymp.* 
114, 3, and therefore three years after the death of Alexander ; but we 
have no direct evidence on this subject. That which we possess of 
the correspondence of Aristotle is undoubtedly not genuine (Stahr, th. 
i., 8. 194-208 ; th. ii., s. 169-234) ; and Schneider says very confidently 
(Hist, de Animal., t. i., p. xl.), " hoc enim tanquam certissimum sumere 
mihi licebit, scriptas comitum Alexandri notitias post mortem demum 
regis fuisse vulgatas." 

* I have elsewhere shown that, although the decomposition of sul- 
phuret of mercuiy by distillation is described in Dioscorides (M:ii. Med., 
v. 110, p. 667, Saracen.), the first description of the distillation of a 
fluid (the distillation of fresh water from sea water) is, however, to be 
found in the commentary of Alexander of Aphrodisias to Aristotle's 
work De Meteorol. See my Examen Critique de VHistoire de la Giogra^ 
fine, t. ii., p. 308-316, and Joannis (Philoponi), Grammatici in libra de 
General, et Alexandri Aphrod., in Meteorol. Comm., Venet., 1527, p. 97 
b. Alexander of Aphrodisias in Caria, the learned commentator of the 
Meteorologica of Aristotle, lived under Septimius Severus and Caracal- 
la; and although he calls chemical apparatuses ;^;i;t/ca opyava, yet a 
passage in Plutarch {De hide et Osir., c. 33) proves that the word Che- 
mie, applied by the Greeks to the Egyptian art, is not derived from 
X^(^- Hoefer (Hisioire de la Chimie, t. i., p. 91, 195, and 219 ; t. ii,^ 
p. 109). 



INFLUENCE OF THE MACEDONIAN CAMPAtGNS. 163 

the skins and bones of animals, and not the soft parts capable 
of dissection, could be sent from remote parts of Asia to Greece. 
However probable it may be that Aristotle received the most 
liberal aid from Philip and Alexander for the furtherance of 
his studies in physical science, for procuring an immense num- 
ber of zoological specimens both from Greece and the neigh- 
boring seas, and for forming a collection of books unique in 
that age, and vv^hich passed successively into the ^jands, first 
of Theophrastes, and afterv^^ard of Neleus of Skepsis, we must 
nevertheless regard the accounts of" the presents of eight hund- 
red talents, and the maintenance of so many thousand col 
lectors, overseers of fish-ponds, and bird-keepers," as mere ex- 
aggerations of a later period, or as traditions misunderstood by 
Pliny, Athenaeus, and iElian.* 

The Macedonian campaign, which opened so large and 
beautiful a portion of the earth to the influence of one sole 
highly-gifted race, may therefore certainly be regarded, in the 
strictest sense of the word, as a scientific expedition, and, 
moreover, as the first in which a conqueror had surrounded 
himself with men learned in all departments of science, as 
naturalists, geometricians, historians, philosophers, and artists. 
The results that we owe to Aristotle are not, however, solely 
to be referred to his own personal labors, for he acted also 
through the intelligent men of his school who accompanied 
the expedition. Among these shone pre-eminently Callisthe- 
.aes of Olynthus, the near kinsman cf the Stagirite, who had 

* Compare Sainte-Croix, Examen des Historiens d' Alexandre, 1810, 
p. 207 ; and Cuvier, Histoire des Sciences Naturelles, t. i., p. 137, with 
Schneider, ad Aristot. de Historid Animalium, t. i., p. xlii., xlvi., and 
Stahr, Aristotelia, th. i., s. 116-118. If, therefore, the transmission of 
specimens from Egypt and the interior of Asia seems to be highly im- 
probable, yet the latest writings of our great anatomist, Johannes MUl- 
ier, show with what wondei-ful dehcacy Aristotle dissected the fishes 
of the Greek seas. See the learned treatise of Johannes MUUer, on the 
adherence of the ovum to the uterus, in one of the two species of the 
genus Mnstelus living in the Mediterranean, which in its foetal state 
possesses a placenta of the vitelline vesicle connected with the uterine 
placenta of the mother, and his researches on the yaleoq letog of Aristo 
tie, in the Abhandl. der Berliner Akad. aus dem Jahr 1840, s. 192-197. 
(Compare Aristot., Hist. Anim., vi., 10, and De Gener, Anim., iii., 3.) 
The distinction and detailed analysis of the species of cuttle-fish, the 
description of the teeth of snails, and the organs of other gasteropodes, 
all testify to the delicate nicety of Aristotle's own anatomical examina- 
tions. Compare Hist, Anim., iv., 1 and 4, with Lebert, in Mttller'a 
Arehiv der Physiologic, 1846, s. 463 und 467. I myself, in 1797, called 
the attention of modern naturalists to the form of snails' teeth. See 
aiy Versuche ubtr die gereizte Mushel und Nervenfaser. bd. i., s, 261. 



164 COSMOS. 

already, before the campaign, composed a work on Botany 
and a treatise on the organs of vision. Owing to the rigid 
austerity of his morals, and the unchecked freedom of hit 
speech, he was regarded with hatred by Alexander himself 
who had already fallen from his noble and elevated mode oi 
thought, and by the flatterers of the prince. Callisthenei 
undauntedly preferred liberty to life ; and when, in Bactria 
he was imphcated, although guiltless, in the conspiracy ck 
Hermolaus and the pages, he became the unhappy occasioi 
of Alexander's exasperation against his former instructor 
Theophrastes, the warm friend and fellow-disciple of Callis 
thenes, had the generosity to undertake his defense after his 
fall. Of Aristotle we only know that he recommended pru- 
dence to his friend before his departure ; for being, as it would 
appear, familiar with a court hfe from his long sojourn with 
Philip of Macedon, he counseled him to " converse as little 
as possible with the king, and, where necessity required that 
he should do so, always to coincide with the views of the sov- 
ereign."* 

Aided by the co-operation of chosen men of the school of 
the Stagirite, Callisthenes, who was already conversant with 
nature before he left Greece, gave a higher direction to the 
investigations of his companions in the extended sphere of ob- 
servation now first opened to them. The richness of vegeta- 
tion and the diversity of animal forms, the configuration of the 
soil and the periodical risftig of great rivers, no longer sufficed 
to engage exclusive attention, for the time was come when man 
and the different races of mankind, in their manifold gradations 
of color and of civilization, could not fail to be regarded, ac- 
cording to Aristotle's own expression,! " as the central point 
and the object of all creation, and as the beings in whom the 
divine nature of thought was first made manifest." From the 
little that remains to us of the narratives of Onesicritus, who 
was so much censured in antiquity, we find that the Mace- 
donians were astonished, on penetrating far to the East, to 
meet with no African, curly-haired negroes, although they 
found the Indian races spoken of by Herodotus as " dark col- 
ored, and resembling Ethiopians. "$ The influence of the at- 
mosphere on color, and the diflerent effect produced by dry and 
moist winds, were carefully noticed. In the early Homeric 

* Valer. Maxim., vii., 2: " ut cum roge aut rarissime a t^zaw ^u 
cundksiine loqueretur." 

i Aristot., Polit., i., 8, aud Eth. ad Eudemum, vii., 14. 
t Strabo, lib. xv., p. 690 and 695. Herod., iii., 101. 



INFLUENCE OF THE MACEDONIAN CAMPAIGNS. 165 

ages, and even long after that period, the dependence of the 
temperature of the air on latitude was wholly unknown, and 
the relations of east and west then constituted the whole ther- 
mic meteorology of the Greeks. The countries lying to the 
east were regarded as near the sun — s,un lands, and the m- 
nabitants as " colored by the near sun-god in his course with 
a sooty luster,* and their hair dried and crisped with the heat 
of his rays." 

Alexander's campaigns first give occasion to a comparison, 
on a grand scale, between the African races which predomin- 
ated so much in Egypt with the Arian races beyond the Ti- 
gris and the ancient Indian Aborigines, who were very dark 
colored, but not woolly haired. The classification of mankind 
into varieties, and their distribution over the surface of the 
earth, which is to be regarded rather as a consequence of his- 
torical events than as the result of protracted climatic rela- 
tions (when the types have been once firmly fixed), together 
with the apparent contradiction between color and places of 
abode, were subjects that could not fail to produce the most 
vivid impression on the mind of thoughtful observers. We 
still find, in the interior of the great Indian continent, an ex- 
tensive territory, which is inhabited by a population of dark, 
almost black aborigines, totally different from the lighter-col- 
ored Arian races, who immigrated at a subsequent period. 
Among these we may reckon, as belonging to the Vindhya 
races, the Gonda, the Bhilla in the forest districts of Malava 
and Guzerat, and the Kola of Orissa. The acute observer 
Lassen regards it as probable that, at the time of Herodotus, 
the black Asiatic races, " the Ethiopians of the sun-rising," 
which resembled the Libyans in the color of their skin, but 
not in the character of their hair, were diffused much fur- 
ther toward the northwest than at present.! In like man- 
ner, in the ancient Egyptian empire, the actual woolly-hair 

* Thus says Theodectes of Phaselis: see vol. i., p. 353. Northern 
tracts of land were considered to lie more toward the west, and south- 
ern countries to the east. Consult Vblcker, Ueher Homerische Geogra- 
phie und Weltkunde, s. 43 und 87. The indefinite meaning of the word 
Indies, even at that age, as connected with ideas of position, of the com- 
plexion of the inhabitants, and of precious products, contributed to the 
extension of these meteorological hypotheses ; for Western Arabia, the 
countries between Ceylon and the mouth of the Indus, Troglodytic 
Ethiopia, and the African myrrh, and cinnamon lands south of Cape 
Aroma, were all termed India. (Humboldt, Examen C'it., t. ii., p. 35.) 

t Lassen, Ind. Alterthums/cunde, bd. i, s. 3^9, 372-37^ 379, und 389; 
Eitter, Asien, bd. i^ , 1, s. 446. 



|66 cosMoa. 

ed negro races, which were so frequently conquered by othei 
l^ations, moved their settlements far to the north of Nubia * 
The enlargement of the sphere of ideas, which arose from 
the contemplation of numerous hitherto unobserved physical 
phenomena, and from a contact with different races, and an 
acquaintance with their contrasted forms of government, was 
not, unfortunately, accompanied by the fruits of ethnological 
comparative philology, as far as the latter is of a philosophical 
nature depending on the fundamental relations of thought, or 
is simply historical. t This species of inquiry was wholly un- 
known to classical antiquity. But, on the other hand, Alex- 
ander's expedition added to the science of the Greeks those 
materials yielded by the long-accumulated knowledge of more 
anciently civilized nations. I would here especially refer to 
the fact that, with an increased knowledge of the earth and 
its productions, the Greeks likewise obtained from Babylon a 
considerable accession to their knowledge of the heavens, as 
we find from recent and carefully-conducted investigations. 
The conquest of Cyrus the Great had certainly greatly dimin- 
ished the glory of the astronomical college of the priests in the 
Oriental capital. The terraced pyramid of Belus (at once a 
temple, a grave, and an observatory, from which the hours of 
the night were proclaimed) had been given over to destruction 
by Xerxes, and was in ruins at the time of the Macedonian 
campaign. But from the very fact of the dissolution of the 
close hierarchical caste, and owing to the formation of many 
schools of astronomy, $ Callisthenes was enabled (and as Sim- 

* The geographical distribution of mankind can no more be determ- 
ined in entire continents by degrees of latitude than that of plants and 
animals. The axiom advanced by Ptolemy ( Geogr., lib. i., cap. 9), that 
north of the parallel of Agisymba there are no elephants, rhinoceroses, 
or negroes, is entirely unfounded {Examen Critique, t. i., p. 39). The 
doctrine of the universal influence of the soil and climate on the intel- 
lectual capacities and on the civilization of mankind, was peculiar to the 
Alexandrian school of Ammonius Sakkas, and more especially to Lon 
ginus. See Proclus, Comment, in Tim., p. 50. 

t See Georg. Curtius, Die Sprachvergleichung in ihrem Verhdltniss 
zur Classischen Philologie, 1845, s. 5-7, and his Bildung der Tempora 
und Modi, 1846, s. 3-9. (Compare, also, Pott's Article, Indogermani- 
tcher Sprachttamm, in the Allgem. Encyklopddie of Ersch and Gruber, 
sect, ii., th. xviii., s. 1-112.) Investigations on language in general, in 
as far as they touch upon the fundamental relations of thought, are, 
however, to be found in Aristotle, where he develops the connection 
of categories with grammatical relations. See the luminous statement 
of this comparison in Adolf Trendelenburg's Histor. Beitrdge zur Phi- 
loiopkie, 1846, th. i., s. 23-32. 

t The schools of the Orchenes and Borsipenes (Strabo, lib . xvi., p 



INFLUENCE OF THE MACEDONIAN CAMPAIGNS. 167 

pHcius maintains, in accordance with the advice of Aristotle) 
to send to Greece observations of the stars for a very long pe- 
riod (Porphyrins says for 1903 years) before Alexander's en- 
trance into Babylon, 01. 112, 2. The earliest Chaldean ob- 
servations mentioned by Almagest (probably the oldest which 
Ptolemy found available for his object) only go back 721 years 
before our era, that is to say, to the first Messenian war. It 
is certain " that the Chaldeans knew the mean motions of the 
moon with an exactness which induced the Greek astronomers 
to employ their calculations for the foundation of a lunar the- 
ory."^ The planetary observations to which they were led 
by their ancient love of astrology appear also to have been 
used for the true construction of astronomical tables. 

The present is not the place to decide how much of the 
Pythagorean views regarding the true structure of the heavens, 
the course of the planets, and of the comets which, according 
to Apollonius Myndius, return in long regulated orbits.t may 
be due to the Chaldeans. Strabo calls the mathematician 
Seleucus a Babylonian, and distinguished him in this manner| 
li'om the Erythra3an, who measured the tides of the sea. It 
is sufficient to remark that the Greek zodiac was most prob- 
ably taken from " the Dodecatemoria of the Chaldeans, and 
that, accordiug to Letronne's important investigations,^ it does 

739). In this passage four Chaldean mathematicians are indicated by 
name, in conjunction with the Chaldean astronomers. This circum- 
stance is so much the more important in an historical point of view, 
because Ptolemy always mentions the observers of the heavenly bodies 
under the collective name of XaXdatoi, as if the observations at Babylon 
were only made collectively in collegiate bodies (Ideler, Handbuch der 
Chronologic, bd. i., 1825, s. 198). 

* Idelei', op. cit., bd. i., s. 202, 20G, und 218. When a doubt is ad- 
vanced regarding the astronomical observations said to have been sent 
by Callisthenes ti-om Babylon to Greece, on the ground that there is no 
trace of these obser\rations of a Chaldean priestly caste to be found in 
the writengs of Aristotle (Delambre, Hist, de V Astronomie Ancienne, t. i., 
p. 308), it is forgotten that Aristotle, in speaking {De Ccelo, lib. ii., cap. 
12) of an occultation of Mars by the Moon, observed by himself, ex- 
pressly adds, that " similar observations had been made for many years 
on the other planets by the Egyptians and the Babylonians, many of 
which have come to our knowledge." On the probable use of astro- 
nomical tables by the Chaldeans, see Chasles, in the Comptes Rendusde 
V Acad6mie des Sciences, t. xxiii., 1846, p. 852-854. 

t Seneca, Nat. Qucest., vii., 17. 

X Compai-e Strabo, lib. xvi., p. 739, with lib. iii., p. 174. 

§ These investigations were made in the year 1824 (see Gnigniaut, 
Religions de V Antiquity, ouvrage traduit de VAllemand de F. Creuzer, 
t. i., Part ii., p. 928). See a more recent notice by Lelronne, in the 
Journal des Savans, 1839, p. 338 and 492, as well as the Analyte Crif 



168 COSMOS. 

not go further back than to the "beginning of the sixth Century 
before our era" 

The direct result of the contact of the Hellenic races with 
nations of Indian origin at the time of the Macedonian expe- 
dition is wrapped in obscurity. In a scientific point of view 
the gain was probably inconsiderable, since Alexander did not 
advance beyond the Hyphasis, in the land of the five rivers 
(the Pantschanada), after he had traversed the kingdom of 
Porus between the Hydaspes (Jelum), skirted by cedars* and 
the Acesines (Tschinab) ; he reached the point of junction, 
however, between the Hyphasis and the Satadru, the Hesidrus 
of Pliny. Discontent among his troops, and the apprehension 
of a general revolt in the Persian and Syrian provinces, forced 
the hero to the great catastrophe of his return, notwithstand- 
ing his wish to advance to the Ganges. The countries trav- 
ersed by the Macedonians were occupied by races who were 
but imperfectly civilized. In the territories intervening be- 
tween the Satadru and the Yamuna (the district of the Indus 
and Ganges), an insignificant river, the sacred Sarasvati, con- 
stitutes an ancient classical boundary between the "pure, 
worthy, pious" worshipers of Brahma in the East, and the 
" impure kingless" tribes in the West, which are not divided 
into castes. t Alexander did not, therefore, reach the true seat 

fique des Representations Zodiacales en Egypte, 1846, p. 15 and 34. 
(Compare with these Ideler, Ueber den IJrsprung des Thierkreises, in 
the Abhandlungen der Akademie der Wissenschafien zu Berlin aus dem 
Jahr 1838, s. 21.) 

* The magnificent groves of Cedrus deodvara, which are most fre- 
quently met with at an elevation of from 8000 to nearly 12,000 feet on 
the Upper Hydaspes (Behut), which flows through the Pilgrim's Lake 
in the Alpine Valley of Kashmeer, supplied the materials for the fleet 
of Nearchus (Barnes's Travels, vol. i., p. 60). The trunk of this cedar 
is often forty feet in circumference, according to the observation of Dr. 
Hoffmeister, the companion of Prince Waldenmr of Prussia, who was 
unhappily too early lost to science by his death on the battle field. 

t Lassen, in his Pentapotamia Indica, p. 25, 29, 57-62, and 77 ; and 
also in his Indische Alterthumskunde, bd. i., s. 91. Between the Saras- 
vati in the northwest of Delhi, and the rocky Drischadvati, there lies, 
according to Menu's code of laws, Brahmavarta, a priestly district of 
Brahma, established by the gods themselves; on the other hand, in the 
wider sense of the word, Aryavarta, the land of the worthy (Arians), 
designates in the ancient Indian geogi-aphy the whole country east of 
the Indus, between the Himalaya and the Vindhya chain, to the south 
of which the ancient non-Arian aboriginal population began. Madhya 
Desa, the middle land referred to in the text, see vol. i., p. 35, was only 
a portion of Aryavarta. Compare my Asie Centrals, t. i., p. 204, and 
Lassen, Ind. Alierthumsk., bd. i., s. 5, 10, und 93. The ancient Indian 
tree atates, the territories of the ** kingless" (condemned by orthodox 



* INFLUENCE UL'' THE MACEDONIAN CAMPAIGNS. 169 

of higher Indian civilization. Seleucus Nicator, the founder 
of the great empire of the SeleucidsB, penetrated from Baby- 
lon toward the Ganges, and estabHshed political relations with 
the powerful Sandrocottus (Tschandraguptas) by means of 
the repeated missions of Megasthenes to Pataliputra.* 

In this manner a more animated and lasting contact was 
established with the most civilized portions of Madhya Desa 
(the middle land). There were, indeed, learned Brahmins 
living as anchorites in the Pendschab (Pentapotamia), but we 
do not know whether those Brahmins and Gymnosophists were 
acquainted with the admirable Indian system of numbers, in 
which the value of a few signs is derived merely from position, 
or whether, as we may however conjecture, the value of posi- 
tion was already at that time known in the most civilized 
portions of India. What a revolution would have been effect- 
ed in the more rapid development and the easier application 
of mathematical knowledge, if the Brahmin Sphines, who ac- 
companied Alexander, and who was known in the army by 
the name of Calanos — or, at a later period, in the time of Au- 
gustus, the Brahmin Bargosa — ^before they voluntarily ascend- 
ed the scaffold at Susa and Athens, could have imparted to 
the Greeks a knowledge of the Indian system of numbers in 
such a manner as to admit of its being brought into general 
use ! The ingenious and comprehensive investigations of 
Chasles have certainly shown that the method of the Abacus 
or Algorismus of Pythagoras, as we find it explained in the 
geometry of Boethius, was nearly identical with the Indian 
numerical system based upon the value of position, but this 
method, which long continued devoid of practical utility among 
the Greeks and Romans, first obtained general application in 
the Middle Ages, and especially when the zero had been sub- 
stituted for a vacant space. The most beneficent discoveries 
have often required centuries before they were recognized and 
fully developed. 

Eastern poets), were situated between the Hydraotes and the Hyphasiat 
(the present Ravi and Beas). 

• Megasthenes, Indka, ed. Schwanbeck, 1846, p. 17. 

Vol. II.— H 



170 COSMOS. 



EXTENSION OF THE CONTEMPLATION OF THE UNIVERSE DNDER THB 
PTOLEMIES.— MUSEUM AT SERAPEUM.— PECULIAR CHARACTER OF 
THE DIRECTION OF SCIENCE AT THIS PERIOD. -ENCYCLOPiEDIC 
LEARNING.— GENERALIZATION OF THE VIEWS OF NATURE RESPECT- 
ING? THE EARTH AND THE REGIONS OF SPACE. 

After the dissolution of the Macedonian empire, which in- 
cluded territories in three continents, those germs were vari- 
ously developed which the uniting and combining system of 
government of the great conqueror had cast abroad in a fruit- 
ful soil. The more the national exclusiveness of the Hellenic 
mode of thought vanished, and the more its creative force of 
inspiration lost in depth and intensity, the greater was the in- 
crease in the knowledge acquired of the connection of phenom- 
ena by a more animated and extensive intercourse with other 
nations, as well as by a rational mode of generalizing views 
of nature. In the Syrian kingdom, under the Attalidse of 
Pergamus, and under the Seleucida) and the Ptolemies, learn- 
ing was universally favored by distinguished rulers. Grecian- 
Egypt enjoyed the advantage of political unity, as well as that 
of a geographical position, by which the traffic of the Indian 
Ocean was brought within a few miles of the Mediterranean 
by the influx of the Arabian Gulf fronl the Straits of Bab-ei- 
Mandeb to Suez and Akaba (running in the line of intersec- 
tion that inclines from south-southeast to north-north west). ^'^ 

The kingdom of the Seleucidse did not enjoy the same ad 
vantage of maritime trade as that afforded by the form and 
configuration of the territories of the Lagides (the Ptolemies), 
and its stability was endangered by the dissensions fomented 
by the various nations occupying the different satrapies. The 
traffic carried on in the Seleucidean kingdom was besides more 
an inland one, limited to the course of rivers or to the caravan 
routes, which defied all the natural obstacles presented by 
snow-capped mountain chains, elevated plateaux, and extens- 
ive deserts. The great inland caravan trade, whose most 
valuable articles of barter were silk, passed from the interior 
of Asia, from the elevated plains of the Seres, north of Uttara 
Kuru, by the stony towerf (probably a fortified caravansery), 
gouth of the sources of the Jaxartes, through the Valley of the 
Oxus to the Caspian and Black Seas. On the other hand, 
the principal traffic of the Ptolemaic empire was, in the strict- 

* See ante, p. 123. 

t Compare my geographical researches, in Asie C entralCf t. i., p. 145 
•nd 151-157 ; t..ii., p. 179. 



INFLUENCE OF THE PTOLEMAIC EPOCH. 171 

est sense of the word, a sea trade, notwithstanding the anima- 
tion of the navigation on the Nile, and the communication be- 
tween the banks of the river, and the artificially constructed 
roads along the shores of the Red Sea. According to the 
grand views of Alexander, the newly-founded Egyptian city 
of Alexandria and the ancient Babylon were to have consti- 
tuted the respective eastern and western capitals of the Mace- 
donian empire ; Babylon never, at any subsequent period, 
realized these hopes, and the prosperity of Seleucia, which was 
built by Seleucus Nicator on the Lower Tigris, and had been 
connected by canals with the Euphrates,* contributed to its 
entire downfall. 

Three great rulers, the three first Ptolemies, whose reigns 
occupied a whole century, gave occasion, by their love of sci- 
ence, their brilliant institutions for the promotion of mental 
culture, and their unremitting endeavors for the extension of 
maritime trade, to an increase of knowledge regarding distant 
nations and external nature hitherto unattained by any peo 
pie. This treasure of genuine, scientific cultivation passed 
fronf the Greek settlers in Egypt to the Romans. Under 
Ptolemseus Philadelphus, scarcely half a century after the 
death of Alexander, and even before the first Punic war had 
shaken the aristocratic republic of the Carthaginians, Alexan- 
dria was the greatest commercial port in the world, forming 
the nearest and most commodious route from the basin of the 
Mediterranean to the southeastern parts of Africa, Arabia, 
and India. The Ptolemies availed themselves with unpre- 
cedented success of the advantages held out to them by a 
route which nature had marked, as it were, for a means of 
universal intercourse witi the rest of the world by the direc- 
tion of the Arabian Gulf,t and whose importance can not even 
now be duly appreciated until the savage violence of Eastern 
nations, and the injurious jealousies of Western powers, shall 
simultaneously diminish. Even after it had become a Ro- 
man province, Egypt continued to be the seat of immense 
wealth, for the increased luxury of Rome, under the Caesars, 
reached to the territory of the Nile, and turned to the uni- 
versal commerce of Alexandria for the chief means of its sat- 
isfaction. 

The important extension of the sphere of knowledge regard- 
ing external nature and difl^erent countries under the Ptole- 
mies was mainly owing to the caravan trade in the interior 

* Plin., vi.,26 (?). 

♦ See Droysen, Gesch. des Hellenistischen Staatensy stems, s. 7 19. 



172 COSMOS. 

of Africa by Cyrene and the Oases ; to the conquest in Ethi- 
opia and Arabia Felix under Ptolemy Euergetes : to the mar- 
rtime trade with the whole of the western peninsula of India, 
from the Gulf of Barygaza (Guzerat and Cambay), along the 
shores of Canara and Malabar (Malayavara, a territory of 
Malaya), to the Brahminical sanctuaries of the promontory 
of Comorin (Kumari),* and to the large island of Ceylon 
(Lanka in the Ramayana, and known to the cotemporarie* 
of Alexander as Taprobane, a corruption of the native name).t 
Nearchus had already materially contributed to the advance 
of nautical knowledge by his laborious five months' voyage 
along the coasts of Gedrosia and Caramania (between Patta- 
la, at the mouths of the Indus, and the Euphrates). 

Alexander's companions were not ignorant of the existence 
of the monsoons, by which navigation was so greatly favored 
between the eastern coasts of Africa and the northern and 
western parts of India. After having spent ten months ia 
navigating the Indus, between Nicaea on the Hydaspes and 
Pattala, with a view of opening the river to a universal traf- 
fic, Nearchus hastened, at the beginning of October (01.tl3, 
3), to sail from Stura, at the mouth of the Indus, since he 
knew that his passage would be favored by the northeast and 
east monsoons to the Persian Gulf along the coasts running 
in the same parallel of latitude. The knowledge of this re- 
markable local law of the direction of the winds subsequently 
imboldened navigators to attempt to sail from Ocelis, on the 
Straits of Bab-el-Mandeb, across the open sea to Muzeris 
(south of Mangolar), the great Malabar emporium of trade, 
to which products from the eastern shores of the Indian pen- 
insula, and even gold from the distant Chryse (Borneo ?), 
were brought by inland trade. The honor of having first ap- 
plied the new system of Indian navigation is ascribed to an 
otherwise unknown seaman named Hippalus, but considerable 
doubt is attached to the age in which he lived. J 

* See Lassen, Indiscke Alterthumskunde, bd. i., s. 107, 153-158. 

+ A corruption of Tdmbapanni. This Pali form sounds in Sanscrit 
Tdmraparni. The Greek form Taprobane gives half the Sanscrit 
(Tdmbra, Tabro) and half the Pali. (Lassen, op. cit., s. 201. Com- 
pare Lassen, Diss, de Taprobane Insula, p. 19.) The Laccadives (lakke 
lor lakscha, and dive for dwipa, one hundred thousand islands), as well 
&amp;8 the Maldives {Malayadiba, islands of Malabar), were known to Al- 
exandrian mariners. 

X Hippalus is not generally supposed to have lived earlier than the 
time of Claudius ; but this view is improbable, even though under the 
first Lagides, a great portion of the Indian products were only pro- 
cured in Arabian markets. The Boutf'-'vest mousooa was, moreover 



INFLUENCE OF THE PTOLEMAIC EPOCS 173 

The history of the contemplation of the universe embrace? 
the enumeration of all the means which have brought nations 
into closer contact with one another, rendered larger portions' 
of the earth more accessible, and thus extended the sphere of 
human knowledge. One of the most important of these 
means was the opening of a road of communication from the 
Red Sea to the Mediterranean by means of the Nile. At the 
point where the scarcely-connected continents present a line 
of bay-like indentations, the excavation of a canal was begun, 
if not by Sesostris (Rameses Miamoun), to whom Aristotle and 
Strabo ascribe the undertaking, at any rate by Neku, although 
the work was relinquished in consequence of the threaten- 
ing oracular denunciations directed against it by the priests. 
Herodotus saw and described a canal completed by Darius 
Hystaspes, one of the AchsemenidBe, which entered the Nile 
somewhat above Bubastus. This canal, after having fallen 
into decay, was restored by Ptolemy Philadelphus in so perfect 
a manner that, although (notwithstanding the skillful arrange- 
ment of sluices) it was not navigable at all seasons of the 
year, it nevertheless contributed to facilitate Ethiopian, Ara 
bian, and Indian commerce at the time of the Roman domin- 
ion under Marcus Aurelius, or even as late as Septimius Se- 
X'erus, and, therefore, a century and a half after its construc- 
tion. A similar object of furthering international communi 
cation through the Red Sea led to a zealous prosecution of 
the works necessary for forming a harbor in Myos Hormos and 
Berenice, which was connected with Coptos by means of an 
admirably made artificial road.* 

All these various mercantile and scientific enterprises of the 
Lagides were based on an irrepressible striving to acquire new 
territories and penetrate to distant regions, on an -idea of con- 
nection and unity, and on a desire to open a wider field of 
action by their commercial and political relations. This di 
rection of the Hellenic mind, so iiuitful in results, and which 
had been long preparing in silence, was manifested, under its 

itself called Hippalus, and a portion of the Erythrean or Indian Ocean 
was known as the Sea of Hippalus. Letronne, in the Journal des Sa- 
vons, 1818, p. 405; Reinaud, Relation des Voyages dans I'Inde, t. i. 

p. XXX. 

* See the researches of Letronne on the construct' ."^n of the canal 
between the Nile and the Red Sea, from the time of iSeku to the Calif 
Omar, or during an interval of more than 13,00 years, in the Revue des 
detix Mondes, t. xxvii., 1841, p. 215-235. Compare, also, Letronne, De 
la Civilisatio7i Egyptienne depuis Psammitickus jusqu^a la conquite 
d' Alexandre, 1845, p. 16-19. 



174 COSMOS. 

noblest type, in the efforts made by Alexander in his campaign 
to fuse together the eastern and western worlds. Its exten- 
sion under the Lagides characterizes the epoch which I would 
here portray, and must be regarded as an important advance 
toward the attainment of a knowledge of the universe in its 
character of unity. 

As far as abundance and variety in the objects presented to 
the contemplation are conducive to an increased amount of 
knowledge, we might certainly regard the intercourse existing 
between Egypt and distant countries ; the scientific exploring 
expeditions into Ethiopia at the expense of the government ;* 
distant ostricht and elephant hunts ; and the establishment of 
menageries of wild and rare animals in the " king's houses of 
Bruchium" as means of incitement toward the study of nat- 
ural history,$ and as amply sufficient to furnish empirical 
science with the materials requisite for its further develop- 
ment ; but the peculiar character of the Ptolemaic period, as 
well as of the whole Alexandrian school, which retained the 
same individuality of type until the third and fourth centuries, 
manifested itself in a different direction, inclining less to an 
immediate observation of particulars than to a laborious accu- 
mulation of the results of that which had already been noted 
by others, and to a careful classification, comparison, and men- 

* Meteorological speculations on the remote causes of the swelling 
of the Nile gave occasion to some of these journeys, since, as Strabo 
expresses it (lib. xvii., p. 789 and 790), " Philadelphus was constantly 
eeeking new diversions and new objects of interest from a desire for 
knowledge and from bodily weakness." 

t Two hunting inscriptions, "^ one of which principally records the 
elephant hunts of Ptolemy Philadelphus," were discovered and copied 
trora the colossi of Abusimbel (Ibsambul) by Lepsius during his 
Egyptian joufney (compare, on this subject, Strabo, lib. xvi., p. 769 
and 770; iElian, De Nat. Anim., iii., 34, and xvii., 3 ; Athenajus, v., p. 
196). Although Indian ivory was an article of export from Barygaza, 
according to the Periplus Maris Eryihrcei, yet, from the statement of 
Cosmas, ivory would also appear to have been exported from Ethiopia 
to the western peninsula of India. Elephants have withdrawn more 
to the south in Eastern Africa, also, since ancient times. According to 
the testimony of Polybius (v., 84), when African and Indian elephants 
were opposed to each other on fields of battle, the sight, smell, and 
cries of the larger and stronger Indian elephants drove the African ones 
to flight. The latter were probably never employed as war elephants 
in such large numbers as in Asiatic expeditions, where Kandragupta 
had assembled 9000, the powerful King of the Prasii 6000, and Akbar 
an equally large number. (Lassen, Jnd. Alterthumskunde, bd i., a. 
305-307.) 

X Athen., xiv., p. 654. Compare Parthey, Das Alexandrinische Mil* 
$cum, eine Preisschrift, s. 55 und 171. 



INFLUENCE OP THE PTOLEMAIC EPOCH. 175 

lal elaboration of these results During a period of many 
centuries, and until the powerful mind of Aristotle was re- 
vealed, the phenomena of nature, not regarded as objects of 
acute observation, vi^ere subjected to the sole control of ideal 
interpretation, and to the arbitrary sway of vague presenti- 
ments and vacillating hypotheses, but from the time of the 
Stagirite a higher appreciation for empirical science was man- 
ifested. The facts already known were now first critically ex- 
amined. As natural philosophy, by pursuing the certain path 
of induction, gradually approached nearer to the scrutinizing 
character of empiricism, it became less bold in its speculations 
and less fanciful in its images A laborious tendency to accu- 
mulate materials enforced the necessity for a certain amoimt 
of polymathic learning ; and although the works of different 
distinguished thinkers occasionally exhibited precious fruits, 
these were unfortunately too often accompanied, in the decline 
of creative conception among the Greeks, by a mere barren 
erudition devoid of animation. The absence of a careful at- 
tention to the form as well as to animation and grace of dic- 
tion, has likewise contributed to expose Alexandrinian learn- 
ing to the severe animadversions of posterity. 

The present section would be incomplete if it were to omit 
a notice of the accession yielded to general knowledge by the 
epoch of the Ptolemies, both by the combined action of extern- 
al relations, the foundation and proper endowment of several 
large institutions (the Alexandrian Museum and two libraries 
at Bruchium and Rhakotis),* and by the collegiate association 
of so many learned men actuated by practical views. This 
encyclopedic species of knowledge facilitated the comparison 
of observations and the generalization of natural views.f The 

* The hbrary in the Bruchium, which was destroyed in the burning 
of the fleet under Juhus Caesar, was the more ancient. The library at 
Rhakotis formed a part of the " Serapeum," where it was connected 
wilh the museum. By the Hberality of Antoninus, the collection of 
books at Pergamus was joined to the library of Rhakotis. 

t Vacherot, Histoire Critique de V Ecole d Alexandrie, 1846, t. i., p. v. 
and 103. The institute of Alexandria, like all academical corporations, 
together with the good arising from the concurrence of many laborers, 
and from the acquisition of material aids, exercised also some nar- 
rowing and restraining influence, as we find from numerous facts fur- 
nished by antiquity. Adrian appointed his tutor, Vestinus, high-priest 
of Alexandria (a sort of minister presiding over the management of 
public worship), and at the same time head of the museum (or presi- 
dent of the academy). (Letroune, Recherches pour servir a VHistoire 
de VEgypte pendant la Domination des Orecs et des Romains, 1823, p. 
251) 



l76 fosMOS. 

great scientific institution which owes its origin to the first ol 
the Ptolemies long enjoyed, among other advantages, that of 
being able to give a free scope to the differently directed pur- 
suits of its members, and thus, although founded in a foreign 
country, and surrounded by nations of different races, it could 
still preserve the characteristics of the Greek acutaness of 
mind and a Greek mode of thought. 

A few examples must suffice, in accordance with the spirit 
and form of the present work, to show how experiments and 
observations, under the protecting influence of the Ptolemies, 
acquired their appropriate recognition as the true sources of 
knowledge regarding celestial and terrestrial phenomena, and 
how, in the Alexandrian period, a felicitous generalization of 
views manifested itself conjointly with a laborious accumula^ 
tion of knowledge. Although the different Greek schools of 
philosophy, when transplanted to Lower Egypt, gave occasion, 
by their Oriental degeneration, to many mythical hypdhese? 
regarding nature and natural phenomena, mathematics still 
constituted the firmest foundation of the Platonic doctrines 
inculcated in the xA.lexandrian Museum ;^ and this science 
comprehended, in the advanced stages of its development, pure 
mathematics, mechanics, and astronomy. In Plato's high ap- 
preciation of mathematical development of thought, as well 
as in Aristotle's morphological views, which embraced all or- 
ganisms, we discover the germs of the subsequent advances of 
physical science. They became the guiding stars which led 
the human mind through the bewildering fanaticism of the 
Dark Ages, and prevented the utter destruction of a sound 
and scientific manifestation of mental vigor. 

The mathematician and astronomer, Eratosthenes of Gy- 
rene, the most celebrated of the Alexandrian librarians, era- 
ployed the materials at his command to compose a system of 
universal g^graphy. He freed geography from mythical le- 
gends, and, although himself occupied with chronology and 
history, separated geographical descriptions from that admix- 
ture of historical elements with which it had previously been 
not ungracefully embodied. The absence of these elements 
was, however, satisfactorily compensated for by the introduc 

* Fries, Gescliichte der Philosophie, bd. ii., s. 5 ; and the same a« 
thor's Lehrbuch der Naturlehre, th. i., s. 42. Compare, also, the con 
Biderations on the influence which Plato exercised on the foundation 
of the experimental sciences by the application of mathematics, ia 
Brandis, Geschi'chte der Griechuc/i-Romischen Philosophie, th. li,, abtb 
i., 6. 276. - 



INFLUENCE OF THE PTOLEMAIC EPOCH. 177 

tion of mathematical considerations on the articulation and 
expansion of continents ; by geognostic conjectures regarding 
the connection of mountain chains, the action of clouds, and 
the former submersion of lands, which still bear all the traces 
of having constituted a dried portion of the sea's bottom. Fa- 
vorable to the oceanic sluice-theory of Strabo of Lampsacus, 
the Alexandrian librarian was led, by the belief of the former 
swelling of the Euxine, the penetration of the Dardanelles, 
and the consequent opening of the Pillars of Hercules, to an 
important investigation of the problem of the equal level of 
the whole " external sea* surrounding all continents." An 
additional proof of this philosopher's power of generalizing 
views is afforded by his assertions that the whole continent 
of Asia is traversed by a continually-connected mountain chain, 
running from west to east in the parallel of Rhodes (in the 
diaphragm of Dicaearchus).t 

An animated desire to arrive at a generalization of views — 
the consequence of the intellectual movement of the age — 
gave rise to the first Greek measurement of degrees between 
Syene and Alexandria, and this experiment may be regarded 
as an attempt on the part of Eratosthenes to arrive at an ap- 
proximative determination of the circumference of the Earth. 
In this case, it is not the result at which he arrived from the 
imperfect premises afforded by the Bematists which excites 
our interest, but rather the attempt to rise from the narrow 
limits of one circumscribed land to a knowledge of the mag- 
nitude of the whole earth. 

A similar tendency toward generalization may be traced in 
the splendid progress made in the scientific knowledge of the 
heavens in the epoch of the Ptolemies. I allude here to the 
determination of the places of the fixed stars by the earliest 
Alexandrian astronomers, Aristyllus and Timochares ; to Aris- 
tarchus of Samos, the cotemporary of Cleanthes, who, conver- 
sant with ancient Pythagorean views, ventured upon an in- 

* On the physical and geognostical opinions of Eratosthenes, see Stra 
bo, Mb. i., p. 49-56 ; Hb. ii., p. 108. 

t Strabo, lib. xi., p. 519; Agathem, in Hudson, Geogr. Grcec. Min., 
vol. ii., p. 4. On the accuracy of the grand orographic views of Eratos- 
thenes, see my Asie Centrale, t. i., p. 104-150, 198, 208-227, 413-415 ; 
t. ii., p. 367 and 414-435 ; and Examen Critique de VHist. de la G6ogr., 
t. i., p. 152-154. I have purposely called the measurement of a degree 
made by Eratosthenes as the first Hellenic one, since a very ancient 
Chaldean determination of the magnitude of a degree in camels' paces 
is not improbable. See Chasles, Recherches sur I' Astronomie Indiennt 
et Chaldienne, in the Comptes Rendvs de V Acad, des Sciences, t. xxiii., 
1846, p. 851. 

H 2 



Its COSMOS. 

vestigation of the construction of the universe, and who was 
the first to recognize the immeasurable distance of the region 
of fixed stars from our small planetary system ; nay, he even 
conjectured the two-fold motion of the earth round its axis and 
round the sun ; to Seleucus of Erj'^threea (or of Babylon),* who, 
a century subsequent to this period, endeavored to establish 
the hypothesis of the Samian philosopher, which, resembling 
the views of Copernicus, met with but little attention during 
that age ; and, lastly, to Hipparchus, the founder of scientific- 
astronomy, and the greatest astronomical observer of antiquity. 
Hipparchus was the actual originator of astronomical tables 
among the Greeks,! and was also the discoverer of the pre- 
cession of the equinoxes. On comparing his own observations 
of fixed stars (made at Rhodes, and not at Alexandria) with 
those made by Timochares and Aristyllus, he was led, proba- 
bly without the apparition of a new star,| to this great dis- 
covery, to which, indeed, the earlier Egyptians might have 
attained by a long-continued observation of the heliacal rising 
of Sirius.§ 

A peculiar characteristic of the labors of Hipparchus is the 
use he made of his observations of celestial phenomena for the 
determination of geographical position. Such a connection 
between the study of the earth and of the celestial regions, mu- 
tually reflected on each other, animated through its uniting 
influences the great idea of the Cosmos. In the new map of 
the world constructed by Hipparchus, and founded upon that 
of Eratosthenes, the geographical degrees of longitude and 
latitude were based on lunar observations and on the measure- 
ments of shadows, wherever- such an application of astronom- 

* The latter appellation appears to me the more correct, since Strabo, 
lib. xvi., p. 739, quotes, " Seleucus of Seleucia, among several very hon- 
orable men, as a Chaldean, skilled in the study of the heavenly bodies." 
Seleucia, on the Tigris, a flourishing commercial city, is probably the 
one meant. It is indeed singular that Strabo also speaks of a Seleucus, 
an exact observer of the tides, and terms him, too, a Babylonian (hb. 
i., p. 6), and* subsequently (lil». iii., p. 174), perhaps from carelessness, 
an Erythrsean. (Compare Stobaeus, Eel. Phys., p. 440.) 

t Ideler, Handbuch der Chronologic, bd. i., s. 212 und 329. 

X Delarabre, Histoire de I'Astronomie Ancienne, t. i., p. 290. 

$ B6ckh has entered into a discussion, in his Philolaos, s. 118, as to 
whether the Pythagoreans were early acquainted, through Egyptian 
sources, with the precession, under the name of the motion of the heav- 
ens of the fixed stars. Letronne (Observations sur les Reprisentation$ 
Zodiacales qui nous restent de VAntiquiU, 1824, p. 62) and Ideler (in his 
Handbuch der ChronoL, bd. i., s. 192) vindicate the exclusive claim of 
Hipparchus to this discovery. 



INFLUENCE OF THE PTOLEMAIC EPOCH. 179 

4cal observations was admissible. While the hydraulic clock 
of Ctesibius, an improvement on the earlier clepsydra, must 
have yielded more exact measurements of time, determinations 
in space must likewise have improved in accuracy, in conse- 
quence of the better modes of measuring angles, which tho 
Alexandrian astronomers gradually possessed, from the period 
of the ancient gnomon and the scaphe to the invention of as- 
trolabes, solstitial armils, and linear dioptrics. It was thus 
that man, and step by step, as it were, by the acquisition of 
new organs, arrived at a more exact knowledge of the move- 
ments of the planetary system. Many centuries, however, 
elapsed before any advance was made toward a knowledge of 
the absolute size, form, mass, and physical character of the 
heavenly bodies. 

Many of the astronomers of the Alexandrian Museum were 
not only distinguished as geometricians, but the age of the 
Ptolemies was, moreover, a most brilliant epoch in the prose- 
cution of mathematical investigations. In the same century 
there appeared Euclid, the creator of mathematics as a science, 
Apollonius of Perga, and Archimedes, who visited Egypt, and 
was connected through Conon with the school of Alexandria. 
The long period of lime which leads from the so-called geo- 
metrical analysis of Plato, and the three conic sections of Me- 
nsechmes,* to the age of Kepler and Tycho Brahe, Euler and 
Clairaut, D'Alembert and Laplace, is marked by a series of 
mathematical discoveries, without which the laws of the mo 
tion of the heavenly bodies and their mutual relations in the 
legions of space would not have been revealed to mankind. 
While the telescope serves as a means of penetrating space, 
;\nd of bringing its remotest regions nearer to us, mathematics, 
by inductive reasoning, have led us onward to the remotest 
regions of heaven, and brought a portion of them within the 
range of our possession ; nay, in our own times — so propitious 
to extension of knowledge — the application of all the elements 
yielded by the present condition of astronomy has even reveal- 
ed to the intellectual eye a heavenly body, and assigned to it 
its place, orbit, and mass, before a single telescope had beea 
directed toward it.f 

* Ideler, on Eudoxus, s. 23. 

t The planet discovered by I.e Verrier. 



180 COSMOS. 



UNIVERSAL DOMINION OF THE ROMANS.— INFLUENCE OF A VAST PO 
LITICAL UNION ON COSMICAL VIEWS— ADVANCE OF GEOGRAPHY 
BY MEANS OF INLAND TRADE.— STRABO AND PTOLEMY.-THE FIRST 
ATTEMPTS TO APPLY MATHEMATICS TO OPTICS AND CHEMISTRY.— 
PLINY'S ATTEMPTS TO GIVE A PHYSICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE UNI- 

■ VERSE.— THE RISE OF CHRISTIANITY PRODUCTIVE OF, AND FAVOR. 
ABLE TO, THE FEELING OF THE UNITY OF MANKIND. 

In tracing the intellectual advance of mankind and the 
gradual extension of cosmical views, the period of the uni- 
versal donainion of the Romans presents itself to our consider- 
ation as one of the most important epochs in the history of the 
world. We now, for the first time, find all the fruitful dis- 
tricts which surround the basin of the Mediterranean asso- 
ciated together in one great bond of political union, and even 
connected w^ith many vast territories in the East. 

The present would seem a fitting place again to remind my 
readers* that the general picture I have endeavored to draw 
of the history of the contemplation of the universe acquires, 
from this condition of political association, an objective unity 
of presentation. Our civilization, understanding the term as 
being synonymous with the intellectual development of all the 
nations included in the European Continent, may be regarded 
as based on that of the inhabitants of the shores of the Medi- 
terranean, and more directly on that of the Greeks and Ro- 
mans. That which we, perhaps too exclusively, term classical 
literature, received the appellation from the fact of its being 
recognized as the source of a great portion of our early knowl- 
edge, and as the means by which the first impulse was awak- 
ened in the human mind to enter upon a sphere of ideas and 
feelings most intimately connected with the socIa¥'and intel- 
lectual elevation of the different races of men.t In these 
considerations we do not by any means disregard the import- 
ance of those elements which have flowed in a variety of dif- 
ferent directions — from the Valley of the Nile, Phcenicia, the 
Euphrates, and the Indus, into the great stream of Greek and 
Roman civilization ; but even for these elements we are orig- 
inally indebted to the Greeks and to the Romans, who were 
surrounded by Etruscans and other nations of Hellenic de- 
scent. How recent is the date of any direct investigation, 
interpretation, and secular classification of the great monu- 
ments of more anciently civilized nations I How short is th« 
time that has elapsed since hieroglyphics and arrow-headed 

* See ante, p. 110, 113, 117, and 141. 

f Wilhelra von Humboldt, l/eber die Kawi-Sprache, bd. i., s. xxxvii 



INFLUENCE OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 181 

ehaiacters were first deciphered, and how numerous are the 
armies ai?d the caravans which, for thousands of years, have 
passed and repassed without ever divining their import ! 

The basin of the Mediterranean, more especially in its va 
ried northern peninsulas, certainly constituted the starting 
point of the intellectual and political culture of those nations 
who now possess what we may hope is destined to prove an 
imperishable and daily increasing treasure of scientific knowl- 
edge and of creative artistic powers, and who have spread 
civihzation, and, with it, servitude at first, but subsequently 
freedom, over another hemisphere. Happily, in our hemi- 
sphere, under the favor of a propitious destiny, unity and di- 
versity are gracefully blended together. The elements taken 
up have been no less heterogeneous in their nature than in the 
affinities and transformations effected under the influence of 
the sharply-contrasting pecufiarities and individual character- 
istics of the several races of men by whom Europe has been 
peopled. Even beyond the ocean, the reflection of these con- 
trasts may still be traced in the colonies and settlements which 
have already become powerful free states, or wMch, it is hoped, 
may still develop for themselves an equal amount of political 
freedom. 

The Roman dominion, in its monarchical form under the 
Csesars, considered according to its area,* was certainly ex- 
ceeded in absolute magnitude by the Chinese empire under the 
dynasty of Thsin and the Eastern Han (from thirty years be- 
fore to one hundred and sixteen years after our era), by the 
Mongolian empire under Genghis Khan, and by the present 
area of the Russian empire in Europe and Asia ; but, with 
the single exception of the Spanish monarchy — as long as it 
extended over the new world — there has never been combined 
under one scepter a greater number of countries favored by 
climate, fertility, and position, than those comprised under the 
Roman empire from Augustus to Constantine. 

This empire, extending from the western extremity of Eu- 
rope to the Euphrates, from Britain and part of Caledonia to 
Gsetulia and the confines of the Libyan desert, manifested not 

* The superficial area of the Roman empire under Augustus is calcu- 
lated by Professor Berghaus, the author of the excellent Physical Atlas, 
at rather more than 400.000 geographical square miles (according to the 
boundaries assumed by Heeren, in his Oeschichte der Slaaten des Alter- 
t'hums., 8. 403-470), or about one fourth greater than the extent of 
1,600,000 square miles assigned by Gibbon, in his History of the Decline 
and Fall of the Roman Empire, vol. i., chap, i., p. 30, but which h« rn 
deed gives as a very uncertain estimate. 



l82 COSMOS. 

only the greatest diversities in the form of the ground, in 
organic proiiucts and physical phenomena, but it also ex* 
hibited mankind in all the various gradations from civiliza^ 
tion to barbarism, and in the possession of ancient knowledge 
and long-practiced arts, no less than in the imperfectly-lighted 
dawn of intellectual awakening. Distant expeditions were 
prosecuted with various success to the north and south, to the 
amber lands, and under ^lius Gallus and Balbus, to Arabia, 
and to the territory of the Garamantes. Measurements of 
the whole empire were begun even under Augustus, by the 
Greek geometricians Zenodoxus and Polycletus, while itinera- 
ries and special topographies were prepared for the purpose of 
being distributed among the different governors of the prov- 
inces, as had already been done several hundred years before 
in the Chinese empire.* These were the first statistical la- 
bors instituted in Europe. Many of the prefectures were trav- 
ersed by Roman roads, divided into miles, and Adrian even 
visited his extensive dominions from the Iberian Peninsula to 
Judea, Egypt, and Mauritania, in an eleven years' journey, 
which was ndt, however, prosecuted without frequent inter 
ruptions. Thus the large portion of the earth's surface, which 
was subject to the dominion of the Romans, was opened and 
rendered accessible, realizing the idea of the pervius orbis with 
more truth than we can attach to the prophecy in the chorus 
&lt;)f the Medea as regards the whole earth. t 

The enjoyment of a long peace might certainly have led us 
to expect that the union under one empire of extensive coun- 
tries having the most varied climates, and the facility with 
which the officers of state, often accompanied by a numerous 
train of learned men, were able to traverse the provinces, 
would have been attended, to a remarkable extent, by an ad- 
vance not only in geography, but in all branches of natural 
science, and by the acquisition of a more correct knowledge of 
the connection existing among the phenomena of nature : yet 
such high expectations were not fulfilled. In this long period 
of undivided Roman empire, embracing a term of almost four 
centuries, the names of Dioscorides the Cilician and Galen of 
Pergamus have alone been transmitted to us as those of ob- 
servers of nature. The first of these, who increased so con- 
siderably the' number of the described species of plants, is far 

* Veget., De Re Mil, iii., 6. 

t Act ii., V. 371, in the celebrated prophecy which, from the time of 
the son lof Columbus, was interpreted to relate to the discovery of 
America. 



INFLUENCE OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 183 

ini4&gt;rIor to the philosophically combining Theophrastcs, while 
thn delicacy of his manner of dissecting, and the extent of his 
physiological discoveries, place Galen, who extended his ob- 
servations to various genera of animals, " very nearly as high 
as Aristotle, and, in some respects, even above him." This 
judgment embodies the views of Cuvier.* 

Besides Dioscorides and Galen, our attention is called to a 
third and great name — that of Ptolemy, I do not mention 
him here as an astronomical systematizer or as a geographer, 
but as an experimental physicist, who measured refraction, 
and who may, therefore, be regarded as the founder of an im- 
portant branch of optical science, although his incontestable 
claim to this title has been but recently admitted. f How- 
ever important were the advances made in the sphere of or- 
ganic life and in the general views of comparative zootomy, 
our attention is yet more forcibly arrested by those physical 
experiments on the passage of a ray of light, which, preceding 
the period of the Arabs by an interval of five hundred years, 
mark the first step in a newly-opened course, and the earliest 
indication of a striving toward the establishment of mathe- 
matical physics. 

The distinguished men whom we have already named as 
shedding a scientific luster on the age of the imperial rulers 
of Rome were all of Greek origin. The profound arithmeti- 
cian and algebraist Diophantus (who was still unacquainted 
with the use of symbols) belonged to a later period. $ Amid 
the different directions presented by intellectual cultivation in 
the Roman empire, the palm of superiority remained with the 
Hellenic races, as the older and more happily-organized peo- 

* Cuvier, Hist, des Sciences Naiurelles, t. i., p. 312-328. 

t Liber Ptholemei de Opticis sive Aspectibus; a rare manuscript of the 
Royal Library at Paris (No. 7310), which I examined on the occasion of 
discovering a remarkable passage on the refraction of rays in Sextus Em- 
piricus (adversiis Astrologos, lib. v., p. 351, Fabr.). The extracts which 
I made from the Paris manuscript in 1811 (therefore before Delambre 
and Venturi) will be found in the introduction to my Recueil d^ Obser- 
vations Astronomiques, t. i., p. Ixv.-lxx. The Greek original has not been 
preserved to us, and we have only a Latin translation of two Arabic 
manuscripts of Ptolemy's Optics. The name of the Latin translator 
was Amiracus Eugenius, Siculus. Compare Venturi, Comment, sopra la 
Storia e Je Teorie delV Ottica, Bologna, 1814, p. 227 ; Delambre, Hist, 
de V Attronomie Ancienne, 1817, t. i., p. 61, and t. ii., p. 410-432. 

X Letronne shows, from the occurrence of the fanatical murder of 
the daughter of Theon of Alexandria, that the much-contested epoch of 
Diophantus can not be placed later than the year 389 (Sur VOrigine 
Offcque des Zodiaques pr6tendu* Egyptiens, 1837, p. 26). 



184 COSMOS. 

pie , but, after the gradual downfall of the Egypto-Alexan 
drian school, the dimmed sparks of knowledge and of intellect- 
ual investigation were scattered abroad, and it was not until 
a later period that they reappeared in Greece and Asia Minor. 
As is the case in all unlimited monarchies embracing a vast 
extent of the most heterogeneous elements, the efforts of the 
Roman government were mainly directed to avert, by miU- 
tary restraint and by means of the internal rivalry existing in 
their divided administration, the threatened dismemberment 
of the political bond ; to conceal, by an alternation of severity 
and mildness, the don&gt;estic feuds in the house of the Cajsars ; 
and to give to the different dependencies such an amount of 
peace, under the sway of noble rulers, as an unchecked and 
patiently-endured despotism is able periodically to afford. 

The attainment of universal sway by the Romans certainly 
emanated from the greatness of the national character, and 
from the continued maintenance of rigid morals, coupled with 
a high sense of patriotism. When once universal empire was 
attained, these noble qualities were gradually weakened and 
altered under the unavoidable infl.uence of the new relations 
induced. The characteristic sensitiveness of separate individ- 
uals became extinguished with the national spirit, and thus 
vanished the two main supports of free institutions, publicity 
and individuality. The eternal city had become the center 
of too extended a sphere, and the spirit was wanting which 
ought to have permanently animated so complicated a state. 
Christianity became the religion of the state when the empire 
was already profoundly shaken, and the beneficent effects of 
the mildness of the new doctrine were frustrated by the dog- 
matic dissensions awakened by party spirit. That dreaiy 
contest of knowledge and of faith had already then begun, 
which continued through so many centuries, and proved, un- 
der various forms, so detrimental to intellectual investigation. 

If the Roman empire, from its extent and the form of con- 
stitution necessitated by its relations of size, was wholly un- 
able to animate and invigorate the intellectual activity of 
mankind, as had been done by the small Hellenic republics 
in their partially -developed independence, it enjoyed, on the 
other hand, peculiar advantages, to which we must here al- 
lude. A rich treasure of ideas was accumulated as a conse- 
quence of experience and numerous observations. The ob- 
jective world became considerably enlarged, and was thua 
prepared for that meditative consideration of natural phenom 
ena which has «iharacterized recent times. National inter 



INFLUENCE OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 185 

course was animated by the Roman dominion, and the Latin 
tongue spread over the whole West, and over a portion of 
Northern Africa. In the East, Hellenism still predominated 
long after the destruction of the Bactrian empire under Mith- 
ridates I., and thirteen years before the irruption of the Sacae 
or Scythians. 

With respect to geographical extent, the Latin tongue 
gained upon the Greek, even before the seat of empire had 
been removed to Byzantium. The reciprocal transfusion of 
these two highly-organized forms of speech, which were so 
rich HI literary memorials, became a means for the more com- 
plete amalgamation and union of different races, while it was 
likewise conducive to an increase of civilization, and to a 
greater susceptibility for intellectual cultivation, tending, as 
Pliny says, " to humanize men and to give them one common 
country."* 

However much the languages of the barbarians, the dumb, 
dyXciiaaoL, as Pollux terms them, may have been generally 
despised, there were some cases in which, according to the 
examples of the Lagides, the translation of a literary work 
from the Punic was undertaken in Rome by order of the 
authorities ; thus, for instance, we find that Mago's treatise 
on agriculture was translated at the command of the Roman 
Senate. 

While the empire of the Romans extended in the Old Con 
tinent as far westward as the northern shores- of the Mediter 
ranean — reaching to its extremest confines at the holy prom 
ontory — its eastern limit, even under Trajan, who navigated 
the Tigris, did not advance beyond the meridian of the Per- 
sian Gulf It was in this direction that the progress of the 
international contact produced by inland trade, whose results 
were so important with respect to geography, was most strong- 
ly manifested during the period under consideration. After 
the downfall of the Grseco-Bactrian empire, the reviving 
power of the Arsacidse favored intercourse with the Seres, al- 
though only by indirect channels, as the Romans were im- 
peded by the active commercial intervention of the Parthians 

* This beneficial influence of civilization, exemplified by the exten 
sion of a language in exciting feelings of general good will, is finely 
characterized in Pliny's praise of Italy : " omnium terrarum alumna 
eadem et parens, numine Deum electa, quiB sparsa congregaret imperi-a, 
ritusque moUiret, et tot populorum discordes ferasque linguas sermoni* 
commercio contraheret,&lt;;olloquia, et humanitatem homini daret, brev. 
iterque una cunctarum gentium in toto orbe patria fieret." (Plin, Hisc. 
Nat., iii., 5.^ 



186 COSMOS. 

from enterirg into relations of direct intercourse with the in« 
habitants ol' the interior of Asia. Movements, which ema- 
nated from the remotest parts of China, produced the most 
rapid, although not long-persisting changes in the political 
condition of the vast territories which lie between' the volcanic 
celestial mountains (Thian-schan) and the chain of the Kuen- 
lun in the north of Thibet. A Chinese expedition subdued 
the Hiungnu, levied tribute from the small territory of Kho- 
tan and Kaschgar, and carried its victorious arms as far as 
the eastern shores of the Caspian. This great expedition, 
which was made in the time of Vespasian and Domitian, was 
headed by the general Pantschab, under the Emperor Mingti, 
of the dynasty of Han, and Chinese writers ascribe a grand 
plan to the bold and fortunate commander, maintaining that 
he designed to attack the Roman empire (Tathsin), but was 
deterred by the admonitory counsel of the Persians.* Thus 
there arose connections between the shores of the Dead Sea, 
the Schensi, and those territories on the Oxus in which an 
animated trade had been prosecuted from an early age with 
the nations inhabiting the coasts of the Black Sea. 

The direction in which the stream of immigration inclined 
in Asia was from east to west, while in the New Continent 
it was from north to south. A century and a half before our 
era, about the time of the destruction of Corinth and Car- 
thage, the first impulse to that " immigration of nations," 
which did not, however, reach the borders of Europe until 
five hundred years afterward, was given, by the attack of the 
Hiungnu (a Turkish race confounded by De Guignes and Jo- 
hann Miiller with the Finnish Huns) on the fair-haired and 
blue-eyed Yueti (Getse ?), probably of Indo-Gerraanic descent,! 
and on the Usun, who dwelt near the wall of China. In this 
manner the stream of population flowed from the upper river 

* Klaproth, Tableaux Historiques de VAsie, 1826, p. 65-67. 

t To this fair-haired, blue-eyed Indo-Germanic, Gothic, or Arian race 
of Eastern Asia, belong the Usun, Tingling, Hutis, and great Yueti. The 
last are called by the Chinese writers a Thibetian nomadic race, who, 
three hundred years before our era, migrated to the district between 
the upper course of the Hoang-ho and the snowy mountains of Nan- 
sclmn. I here recall this descent, as the Seres (Plin., vi., 22) are also 
described as "rutilis nomis et caeruleis oculis." (Compare Ukert, 
Geogr. der Oriech. und Romer, th. iii., abth. 2, 1845, s. 275.) We are 
indebted for the knowledge of these ftiir-haired races (wno, in the 
most eastern part of Asia, gave the first impulse to what has been called 
"the great migration of nations") to the researches of Abel Remusat 
and Klaproth, which belong t-^ the most brilliant historical discoveriei' 
of our age. 



INFLUENCE OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 187 

valltj^ of the Hoang-ho westward to the Don and the Danube, 
and the opposite tendencies of these currents, which at first 
brought the different races into antagonist conflict in the north- 
ern parts of the Old Continent, ended in establisliing friendly 
relations of peace and commerce. It is when considered from 
this point of view that great currents of migration, advancing 
like oceanic currents between masses which are themselves 
unmoved, become objects of cosmical importance. 

In the reign of the Emperor Claudius, the embassy of Ra- 
chias of Ceylon came to Rome by way of Egypt. Under 
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus (named An-tun by the writers of 
the history of the dynasty of Han), Roman legates visited the 
Chinese court, having come by sea by the route of Tunkin. 
We here observe the earliest traces of the extended intercourse 
of the Romans with China and India, since it is highly prob- 
able that the knowledge of the Greek sphere and zodiac, as 
well as that of the astrological planetary week, was not gen- 
erally diffused until the first century of our era, and that it was 
then effected by means of this intercourse between the two 
countries.* The great Indian mathematicians Warahamihira, 
Brahmagupta, and perhaps even Aryabhatta, lived at a more 
recent period than that under consideration ;t but the elements 
of knowledge, either discovered by Indian nations, frequently 
in different and wholly independent directions, or existing 
among these ancient civilized races from primitive ages, may 
have penetrated into the West even before the time of Dio- 
phantus, by means of the extended commercial relations exist- 
ing between the Ptolemies and the Caesars. I will not here 
attempt to determine what is due to each individual race and 
epoch, my object being merely to indicate the different chan- 
nels by which an interchange of ideas has been effected. 

The strongest evidence of the multiplicity of means, and 
the extent of the advance that had been made in general in- 
tercourse, is testified by the colossal works of Strabo and Ptol- 
emy. The gifted geographer of Amasea does not possess the 
numerical accuracy of Hipparchus, or the mathematical and 

* See Letronne, in the Observations Critiques et Archiologiqnes tftir 
les Representations Zodiacales de V Antiquity, 1824, p. 99, as well as his 
/ater work, Sur VOrigine Grecqiie des Zodiaques priteiidus Egyptiem. 
1837, p. 27. 

t The sound inquirer, Colebrooke, places Warahamihira in the fifth, 
Brahmagupta at the end of the sixth century, and Aryabhatta rather in- 
definitely between the years 200 and 400 of our era. (Compare Holtz. 
mann, Uebei- den Qriechischen Ursprung des Indischen Thierkreiiet 
!841, 8. 23.) 



188 COSMOS. 

geographical information of Ptolemy ; but his work surpasses 
all other geographical labors of antiquity by the diversity of 
the subjects and the grandeur of the composition. Strabo, as 
he takes pleasure in informing us, had seen with his own eyea 
a considerable portion of the Roman empire, " from Armenia 
to the Tyrrhenian coasts, and from the Euxine to the borders 
of Ethiopia." After he had completed the historical work of 
Polybius by the addition of forty-three books, he had the cour- 
age, in his eighty- third year,* to begin his work on geography. 
He remarks, " that in his time the empire of the Romans 
and Parthians had extended the sphere of the known world 
more even than Alexander's campaigns, from which Eratos- 
thenes derived so much aid." The Indian trade was no lon- 
ger in the hands of the Arabs alone ; and Strabo, when in 
Egypt, remarked with astonishment the increased number of 
vessels passing directly from Myos Hormos to India. t In 
imagination he penetrated beyond India as far as the eastern 
shores of Asia. At this point, in the parallel of the Pillars of 
Hercules and the island of Rhodes, where, according to his 
idea, a connected mountain chain, a prolongation of the Tau- 
rus, traversed the Old Continent in its greatest width, he con- 
jectured the existence o^ another continent between the west 
of Europe and Asia. " It is very possible," he writes,! ** that 

* On the reasons on which we base our assertion of the exceedingly 
'ate commencement of Strabo's work, see Groskurd's German transla- 
tion, th. i., 1831, 8. xvii. 

t Strabo, lib. i., p. 14 ; lib. ii., p. 118; lib. xvi., p. 781 ; lib. xvii., p. 
789 and 815. 

X Compare the two passages of Strabo, lib. i., p. 65, and lib. ii., p. 1 18 
(Humboldt, Examen Critique de VHist. de la G6ographie, t. i., p. 152- 
154). In the important new edition of Strabo. published by Gustav 
Kramer. 1844, th. i., p. 100, '• the parallel of Athens is read for the par- 
allel of Thinae, as if Thinaj had first been named in the Pseudo-Arrian, 
in the Periplns Maris Rubric Dodwell places the Periplus under 
Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus, while, according to Letronne, it 
was written under Septimius Severus and Caracalla. Although five 
passages in Strabo, according to all our manuscripts, have Thints, yet 
lib. ii., p. 79, 86, 87, and, above all, 82, in which Eratosthenes himself 
'is named, prove decidedly that the reading should be the " parallel of 
Athens and Rhodes." These two places were confounded, as old geog- 
raphers made the peninsula of Attica extend too far toward the south. 
It would also appear surprising, supposing the usual reading QlvC&gt;v 
KVK^oi; to be the more correct, that a particular parallel, the Diaphragm 
of DiciHarchus, should be called after a place so little known as that of 
the Sines (Tsin). However, Cosmas Indicopleustes also connects his 
Tzinitza (Thina^) with the chain of mountains which divides Persia and 
the Romanic districts no loss than the whole habitable world into two 
parts, subjoining the remarkable observation that this division is accord* 



INFLUENCE OP THE ROMAN EMURE. 189 

m the same temperate zone, near the parallel of Thin* or 
Athens, which passes through the Atlantic Ocean, besides the 
world we inhabit, there may be one or more other worlds peo- 
pled by beings different from ourselves." It is astonishing 
that this expression did not attract the attention of Spanish 
writers, who, at the beginning of the sixteenth century, be- 
lieved that they every where, in classical authors, found the 
traces of a knowledge of the New World. 

" Since," as Strabo well observes, " in all works of art 
which are designed to represent something great, the object 
aimed at is not the completeness of the individual parts," his 
chief desire, in his gigantic work, is pre-eminently to direct 
attention to the form of the whole. This tendency toward a 
generalization of ideas did not prevent him, at the same time, 
from prosecuting researches which led to the establishment of 
a large number of admirable physical results, referring more 
especially to geognosy.* He entered, like Posidonius and Po- 
lybius, into the consideration of the influence of the longer or 
shorter interval that occurred between each passage of the sun 
across the zenith ; of the maximum of atmospheric heat un- 
der the tropics and the equator ; of the various causes which 
give rise to the changes experienced by the earth's surface ; 

ing to the " belief of the Indian philosophers and Brahmins." Com- 
pare Cosmas, in Montfaucon, Collect, nova Patrum., t. ii., p. 137 ; and 
my Asie Centrale, t. i., p. xxiii., 120-129, and 194-203; t. ii., p. 413. 
Cosmas and the Pseudo-Arrian, Agathemeros, according to the learned 
investigations of Professor Franz, decidedly ascribe to the metropolis 
of the Sines a high northern latitude (nearly in the parallel of Rhodes 
and Athens) ; while Ptolemy, misled by the accounts of mariners, has 
no knowledge except of a Thinae three degrees south of the equator 
(Gcogr., i., 17). I conjecture that Thinae merely meant, generally, a 
Chinese emporium, a harbor in the land of Tsin, and that, therefore, 
one Thina? (Tzinitza) may have been designated north of the equator, 
and another south of the equator. 

* Strabo, lib. i., p. 49-60 ; lib. ii., p. 95 and 97 ; lib. vi., p. 277 ; lib. 
xvii., p. 830. On tlie elevation of islands and of continents, see partic- 
ularly lib. i., p. 51, 54, and 59. The old Eleat Xenophanes was led to 
conclude, from the numerous fossil marine productions found at a dis- 
tance from the sea, that " the present dry ground had been raised from 
the bottom of the sea" (Origen, Philosophumena, cap. 4). Apuleius 
collected fossils at the time of the Antonines from the Gaetuhan (Mauri- 
tanian) Mountains, and attributed them to the Deucalion flood, to which 
he ascribed the same character of universality as the Hebrew^s to the 
Deluge of Noah, and the Mexican Azteks to that of the Coxcox. Pro- 
fessor Franz, by means of very careful investigation, has refuted the 
belief entertained by Beckmann and Cuvier, that Apuleius possessed a 
collection of specimens of natural history. (See Beckmann's Hutory 
•f Inventions, Bohn's Standard Library (1846), vol. i., p. 285 ; and Hist 
des Sciences Nat., t. i. p. 350.) 



190 COSMOS. 

of the breaking forth of originally closed seas ; of tb* general 
level of the sea, which was already recognized by Archimedes , 
of oceanic currents ; of the eruption of submarine volcanoes , 
of the petrifactions of shells and the impressions of fishes ; and. 
lastly, of the periodic oscillations of the earth's crust, a subject 
that most especially attracts our attention, since it constitutes 
the germ of modern geognosy. Strabo expressly remarks that 
the altered limits of the sea and land are to be ascribed less 
to small inundations than to the upheaval and depression of 
the bottom, for " not only separate masses of rock and islands 
of difierent dimensions, but entire continents, may be upheav- 
ed." Strabo, like Herodotus, was an attentive observer of the 
descent of nations, and of the diversities of the different races 
of men, whom he singularly enough calls " land and a^ix ani- 
mals, which require much light."* We find the ethnological 
distinction of races most sharply defined in the Commenta- 
ries of Julius Caesar, and in the noble eulogy on AgricoU by 
Tacitus. 

Unfortunately, Strabo's great work, which was so rich in 
facts, and whose cosmical views we have already allude4 to, 
remained almost wholly unknown in Roman antiquity u^atil 
the fifth centur}', and was not even then made use of by that 
universal collector, Phny. It was not until the close of the 
INIiddle Ages that Strabo exercised any essential influence on 
the direction of ideas, and even then in a less marked degree 
than that of the more mathematical and more tabularly cpa- 
cise geography of Claudius Ptolemaeus, which was almost 
wholly wanting in views of a truly physical character. Tbyj 
latter work served as a guide to travelers as late as the six- 
teenth century, while every new discovery of places was al- 
ways supposed to be recognized in it under some other appel- 
lation. 

In the same manner as natural historians long continued 
to include all recently-discovered plants and animals under 
the classifying definitions of Linnaeus, the earliest maps of thr 
New Continent appeared in the Atlas of Ptolemy, whiclr 
Agathodaemon prepared at the same time that, in the remot- 
est part of Asia among the highly-civilized Chinese, the west- 
ern provinces of the empire were already marked in forty-foui 
divisions. t The Universal Geography of Ptolemy has indeed 
the advantage of presenting us with a pictuie of the whole 
world represented graphically in outlines, and numerically in 
determinations of places, according to their parallels of longi- 

• Strabo, lib. xv-ii., p. 810. t Carl Ritter, Asien th. v., s. 560. 



INFLUENCE OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 191 

tude and latitude, and to the length of the day ; but, notwith- 
standing the constant reference to the advantages of astro 
nomical results over mere itinerary measurements by land and 
sea, it is, unfortunately, impossible to ascertain, among these 
uncertain positions (upward of 2500 of which are given), the 
nature of the data on which they are based, and the relative 
probability which may be ascribed to them, from the itinera- 
ries then in existence. 

The entire ignorance of the polarity of the magnetic needle, 
and, consequently, of the use of the compass (which, twelve 
centuries and a half before the time of Ptolemy, under the 
Chinese Emperor Tsing-wang, had been used, together with a 
way measurer, in the construction of the magnetic cars), 
caused the most perfect of the itineraries of the Greeks and 
Romans to be extremely uncertain, owing to the deficiency 
of means for learning with certainty the direction or the line 
which formed the angle with the meridian.* 

In proportion as a better knowledge has been acquired, in 
modern times, of the Indian and ancient Persian (or Zend) 
languages, we are more and more astonished to find that a 
great portion of the geographical nomenclature of Ptolemy 
may be regarded as an historical monument of the commercial 
relations existing between the West and the remotest regions 
of Southern and Central Asia.t We may reckon the knowl- 
edge of the complete insulation of the Caspian Sea as one of 
the most important results of these relations, but it was not 

* See a collection of the most striking instances of Greek and Roman 
errors, regarding the directions of diflerent mountain chains, in the in- 
troduction to my Asie Cenirale, t. i., p. xxxvii.-xl. Most satisfactory 
investigations respecting the uncertainty of the numerical bases of Ptol- 
emy's positions are to be found in a treatise of Ukert, in the Rheinische 
Museum fur Philologie, Jahrg., vi., 1838, s. 314-324. 

t For examples of Zend and Sanscrit words which have been pre 
served to us in Ptolemy's Geography, see Lassen, Diss, de Tafroban. 
Insula, p. 6, 9, and 17 ; Bumouf 's Comment, sur le Yagna, t. i., p. 
xciii.-cxx. and clxxxi.-clxxxv. ; and my Examen Crit. de VHist. de la 
Giogr., t. i., p. 45-49. In a few cases Ptolemy gives both the Sanscrit 
names and their significations, as, for the island of Java, " barley island," 
'\a6a6Lov, 6 orifiatvEL Kptdij^ v^aoc, Ptol., vii., 2 (Wilhelm von Humboldt, 
Ueber die Kawi-Sprache, bd. i., s. 60-63). According to Buschmani\ 
the two-stalked barley, Hordeum distichon, is still termed in the princi- 
pal Indian languages (as in Hindostanee, Bengalee, and Nepaulese, and 
in the Mahratta, Guzerat, and Cingalese languages), as well as in Per- 
sian and Malay, yava, dschav, or dsckau, and in the language of Orissa, 
yaa. (Compare the Indian translation of the Bible, in the passage Joh. 
vi., 9, and 13, and Ainslie, Materia Medica of Hindostan, Madras. 18 J? 
p. 217.) 



192 COSMOS. 

until after a pBriod of five hundred years that the accuracy of 
the fact was re-estabhshed by Ptolemy. Herodotus and Aris- 
totle entertained correct views regarding this subject, and the 
latter fortunately wrote his Meteorologica before the Asiatic 
campaigns of Alexander. The Olbiopolites, from whose hps 
the father of history derived his information, were well ac- 
quainted with the northern shores of the Caspian Sea, between 
Cuma, the Volga (Rha), and the Jaik (Ural), but there were 
no indications that could lead to the supposition of its connec- 
tion with the Icy Sea. Very different causes led to the de- 
ception of Alexander's army, when, passing through Hecatom- 
pylos (Damaghan) to the humid forests of Mazanderan, at 
Zadrakarta, a little to the west of the present Asterabad, they 
saw the Caspian Sea stretching northward in an apparently 
boundless expanse of waters. This sight first gave rise, as 
Plutarch remarks in his Life of Alexander, to the conjecture 
that the sea they beheld was a bay of the Euxine.* The 
Macedonian expedition, although, on the whole, extremely 
favorable to the advance of geographical knowledge, neverthe- 
less gave rise to some errors which long held their ground 
The Tanais was confounded with the Jaxartes (the Araxes 
of Herodotus), and the Caucasus with the Paropanisus (the 
Hindoo-Coosh). Ptolemy was enabled, during his residence 
in Alexandria, as well as from the expeditions of the Aorsi, 
whose camels brought Indian and Babylonian goods to the 
Don and the Black Sea,t to obtain accurate knowledge of the 
countries which immediately surrounded the Caspian (as, for 
instance, Albania, Atropatene, and Hyrcania). If Ptolemy, 
in contradiction to the more correct knowledge of Herodotus, 
believed that the greater diameter of the Caspian Sea inclined 
from west to east, he might, perhaps, have been misled by a 
vague knowledge of the former great extension of the Scythian 
gulf (Karabogas), and the existence of Lake Aral, the earliest 
definite notice of which we find in the work of a Byzantine 
author, Menander, who wrote a continuation of Agathias.J 

It is to be regretted that Ptolemy, who had arrived at so 
correct a knowledge of the complete insulation of the Caspian 
(after it had long been considered to be open, in accordance 
with the hypothesis of four gulfs, and even according to sup- 

* See my Examen Crit. de VHist. de la G^ographie, t. ii., p. 147-188 

t Strabo, lib. xi., p. 50G. 

X Menander, De Legationibus Barharorum ad Romanos, ei Romano- 
rum ad Gmtes, e rec. Bekkeri et Niebuhr, 1829, p "^00, 619, 623, and 
€28 



INFLUENCE OP THE ROxMAN EMPIRE. 193 

posed reflections of similar forms on the moon's disk) * should 
not have relinquished the myth of the unknown south land 
connecting Cape Prasum .with Cattigara and Thinae (Si?ia- 
rum Metropolis), joining, therefore, Eastern Africa with the 
land of Tsin (China). This myth, which supposes the Indian 
Ocean to be an inland sea, was based upon views which may 
be traced from Marinus of Tyr.e to Hipparchus, Seleucus the 
Babylonian, and even to Aristotle. t We must limit ourselves, 
in these cosmical descriptions of the progress made in the con- 
templation of the universe, to a few examples illustrative of 
the fluctuations of knowledge, by which imperfectly-recognized 
facts were so often rendered still more obscure. The more the 
extension of navigation and of inland trade led to a hope that 
the whole of the earth's surface might become known, the 
more earnestly did the ever-wakeful imagination of the Greeks, 
especially in the Alexandrian age under the Ptolemies and 
under the Roman empire, strive by ingenious combinations to 
fuse ancient conjectures with newly-acquired knowledge, and 
thus speedily to complete the scarcely sketched map of the 
earth. We have already briefly noticed that Claudius Ptole- 
mseus, by his optical inquiries, which have been in part pre- 
served to us by the Arabians, became the founder of one branch 
of mathematical physics, which, according to Theon of Alex- 
andria, had already been noticed, with reference to the refrac- 
tion of rays of light, in the Catoptrica of Archimedes.f We 
may esteem it as an important advance when physical phenom- 
ena, instead of being simply observed and compared together 
(of which we have memorable examples in Greek antiquity, 
in the comprehensive pseudo- Aristotelian problems, and in 
Roman antiquity in the works of Seneca), are intentionally 
evoked under altered conditions, and are then measured. § 

* Plutarch, De Facie in Orbe Lun&lt;s, p. 921, 19 (compare my Examen 
Crit., t. i., p. 145-191). I have myself met, among highly-informed 
Persians, with a repetition of the hypothesis of Agesianax, according to 
which, the marks on the moon's disk, in which Plutarch (p. 935, 4) 
thought he saw " a peculiar kind of shining mountains" (volcanoes ?), 
were merely the reflected images of terrestrial lands, seas, and isth- 
muses. These Persians would say, for instance, " What we see through 
telescopes on the surface of the moon are the reflected images of our 
own country." 

t Ptolem., lib. iv., cap. 9 ; lib. vii., cap. 3 and 5. Compare Letronne, 
in the Journal des Savans, 1831, p. 476-480, and 545-555 ; Humboldt, 
Examen Crit., t. i., p. 144, 161, and 329; t. ii., p. 370-373. 

X Delambre, Hist, de V Astronomie Ancienne, t. i., p. liv. ; t. ii., p. 551. 
Theon never makes any mention of Ptolemy's Optics^ although he lived 
fully two centuries after him. 

$ It is often difficult, in reading ancient works on physics, to decide 
Vol. II.— I 



104 COSMOS. 

This lattei mode of proceeding characterizes the investiga- 
tions of Ptolemy on the refraction of rays in their passage 
through media of unequal density, Ptolemy caused the rays 
to pass from air into water and glass, and from water into 
glass, under different angles of incidence, and he finally ar- 
ranged the results of these physical experiments in tables. 
This measurement of a physical phenomenon called forth at 
will, of a process of nature not dependent upon a movement 
of the waves of light (Aristotle, assummg a movement of the 
•nedium between the eye and the object), stands wholly iso- 
;.ated in the period which we are now considering.* This age 
presents, with respect to investigation into the elements of na 
ture, only a few chemical experiments by Dioscorides, and, as 
I have already elsewhere noticed, the technical art of collect- 
ing fluids by the process of distillation.t Chemistry can not 
be said to have begun until man learned to obtain mineral 
acids, and to employ them for the solution and liberation ol 
substances, and it is on this account that the distillation of sea 
water, described by Alexander of Aphrodisias under Caracalla, 
is so worthy of notice. It designates the path by which man 
gradually arrived at a knowledge of the heterogeneous nature 
of substances, their chemical composition, and their mutuai 
aifinities. 

The only names which we can bring forward in connection 
with the study of organic nature are the anatomist Marinus , 
Rufus of Ephesus, who dissected apes, and distinguished be- 
tween nerves of sensation and of motion ; and Galen of Per- 
gamus, who eclipsed all others. The natural history o^ ttii- 
mals by -^lian of Preeneste, and the poem on fishes by Op- 
Tpianus of Cilicia, contain scattered notices, but no facts basea 
on personal examination. It is impossible to comprehend how 
the enormous multitudes of elephants, rhinoceroses, hippopot 
amuses, elks, lions, tigers, panthers, crocodiles, and ostriches, 
which for upward of four centuries were slain in the Roman 

whether a particular result has sprung from a phenomenon purposely 
called forth or accidentally observed. Where Aristotle {De Coelo, iv., 
4) treats of the weight of the atmosphere, which, however, Ideler ap- 
pears to deny (^Meteorologia veterum. Grcecorum et Romanorum, p. 23), 
he says distinctly, " an inflated bladder is heavier than an empty one." 
The experiment must have been made with condensed air, if actually 
tried. 

* Aristot., De Anima., ii., 7 ; Biese, Die Philosophic des Aristot., bd* 
ii., 8. 147. 

t Joannis {PkUoponi) Orammatici, in libr. De General., and Aleat- 
ardri Aphrodis., in Meteorol. Comment. (Venet., 1527), p. 97, b. Con*' 
pare my Ezamen Critique, t. ii., p. 306-312 



INFLUENCE OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. I9i&gt; 

circus, should have failed to advance the knowledge of com- 
parative anatomy.* I have already noticed the merit of 
Dioscorides in regard to the collection and study of plants, 
and it only remains, therefore, to observe that his works exer- 
cised the greatest influence on the botany and pharmaceutical 
chemistry of the Arabs. The botanical garden of the Ro- 
man physician Antonius Castor, who lived to be upward of a 
hundred years of age, was perhaps laid out in imitation of the 
botanical gardens of Theophrastes and Mithridates, but it did 
not, in all probability, lead to any further advancement in 
science than did the collection of fossil bones Ibrmed by the 
Emperor Augustus, or the museum of objects and products of 
nature which has been ascribed on very slight foundation to 
Apuleius of Madaura.f 

The representation of the contributions made by the epoch 
of the Roman dominion to cosmical knowledge would be in- 
complete were I to omit mentioning the great attempt made 
by Caius Plinius Secundus to comprise a description of the 
universe in a work consisting of thirty-seven books. In the 
whole of antiquity, nothing similar had been attempted ; and 
although the work grew, from the nature of the undertaking, 
into a species of encyclopaedia of nature and art (the authoi 
himself, in his dedication to Titus, not scrupling to apply to 
his work the then more noble Greek expression kyKVKXoTxai- 
dela, or conception and popular sphere of universal knowledge), 
yet it must be admitted that, notwithstanding the deficiency of 
an internal connection among the difierent parts of which the 
whole is composed, it presents the plan of a physical descrip- 
tion of the universe. 

The Historia Naturalis of Pliny, entitled, in the tabular 
view which forms what is known as the first book, Historia 
Mundi, and in a letter of his nephew to his friend Macer still 
more aptly, NaturcB Historia, embraces both the heavens and 
the earth, the position and course of the heavenly bodies, the 
meteorological processes of the atmosphere, the form of the 

* The Numidian Metellus caused 142 elephants to be killed in the 
circus. In the games which Pompey gave, 600 lions and 406 panthera 
were assembled. Augustus sacrificed 3500 wild beasts in the national 
festivities, and a tender husband laments that he could not celebrate 
the day of his wife's death by a sanguinary gladiatorial fight at Verona^ 
" because contrary winds had detained in port the panthers which had 
been bought in Africa !" (Plin., Epist., vi., 34.) 

t See ante, p. 190. Yet Apuleius, as Cuvier remarks (Hist, des Scien 
ees Naturelles, t. i., p. 287 \ was the first to describe accurately the bony 
book in the second and tnird stomach of the Aplysise. 



196 COSMOS. 

earth's surface, and all terrestrial objects, from the vegetable 
mantle with which the land is covered, and the raollusca of 
the ocean, up to mankind. Man is considered, according to 
the variety of his mental dispositions and his exaltation of 
these spiritual gifts, in the development of the noblest crea- 
tions of art. I have here enumerated the elements of a gener- 
al knowledge of nature which lie scattered irregularly through- 
out different parts of the work. " The path on which I am 
about to enter," says Pliny, with a noble self-confidence, " is 
untrodden {non trita aiictoribus via) ; no one among my own 
countrymen, or among the Greeks, has as yet attempted to 
treat of the whole of nature under its character of universal- 
ity {neynoapud Gi-cecos qui unus omnia tractaverit). If my 
undertaking should not succeed, it is, at any rate, both beau- 
tiful and noble {pulchrum atque magnijkum) to have made 
the attempt." 

A grand and single image floated before the mind of the 
intellectual author ; but, suffering his attention to be distract- 
ed by specialities, and wanting the living contemplation of na- 
ture, he was unable to hold fast this image. The execution 
was incomplete, not merely from a superficiality of views, and 
a want of knowledge of the objects to be treated of (here we, 
of course, can only judge of the portions that have come down 
to us), but also from an erroneous mode of arrangement. We 
discover in the author the busy and occupied man of rank, 
who prided himself on his wakefulness and nocturnal labors, 
but who, undoubtedly, too often confided the loose web of an 
endless compilation to his ill-informed dependents, while he was 
himself engaged in superintending the management of public 
affairs, when holding the place of Governor of Spain, or of a 
superintendent of the fleet in Lower Italy. This taste for 
compilation, for the laborious collection of the separate ob- 
servations and facts yielded by science as it then existed, is 
by no means deserving of censure, but the want of success that 
has attended Pliny's undertaking is to be ascribed to his inca- 
pacity of mastering the materials accumulated, of bringing the 
descriptions of nature under the control of higher and more 
general views, or of keeping in sight the point of view pre- 
sented by a comparative study of nature. The germs of such 
nobler, not merely orographic, but truly geognostic views, were 
to be met with in Eratosthenes and Strabo ; but Pliny never 
made use of the works of the latter, and only on one occasion 
of those of the former ; nor did Aristotle's History of Animals 
teach him ',heir division int* large classes based upon internal 



INFLUENCE OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 197 

organization, or lead him to adopt the method of induction, 
which is the only safe means of generalizing results. 

Beginning with pantheistic considerations, Pliny descends 
from the celestial regions to terrestrial objects. He recognizes 
the necessity of representing the forces and the glory of na- 
ture {^/laturce vis atque Tuajestas) as a great and comprehen- 
sive whole (I would here refer to the motto on the title of my 
work), and at the beginning of the third book he distinguishes 
between general and special geography ; but this distinction 
is again soon neglected when he becomes absorbed in the dry 
nomenclature of countries, mountains, and rivers. The great- 
er portions of Books VIII.-XXVII., XXXITI. and XXXIV., 
XXXVI. and XXXVII., consist of categorical enumera- 
tions of the three kingdoms of nature. Pliny the Younger, 
in one of his letters, justly characterizes the work of his un- 
cle as " learned and full of matter, no less various than Na- 
ture herself (opus diffusum, eruditum, nee minus varium 
quam ipsa natura)." Many things which have been made 
subjects of reproach against Pliny as needless and irrelevant 
admixtures, rather appear to me deserving of praise. It has 
always afforded me especial gratification to observe that he 
refers so frequently, and with such evident partiality, to the 
influence exercised by nature on the civilization and mental 
development of mankind. It must, however, he admitted, 
that his points of connection are seldom felicitously chosen (as, 
for instance, in VII., 24-47 ; XXV., 2 ; XXVI., 1 ; XXXV., 
2 ; XXXVI., 2-4 ; XXXVII., 1). Thus the consideration 
of the nature of mineral and vegetable substances leads to the 
introduction of a fragment of the history of the plastic arts, 
but this brief notice has become more important, in the pres- 
ent state of our knowledge, than all that we can gather re- 
garding descriptive natural history from the rest of the work. 

The style of Pliny evinces more spirit and animation than 
true dignity, and it is seldom that his descriptions possess any 
degree of pictorial distinctness. We feel that the author has 
drawn his impressions from books and not from nature, how- 
ever freely it may have heen presented to him in the different 
regions of the earth which he visited. A grave and somber 
tone of color pervades the whole composition, and this senti- 
mental feeling is tinged with a touch of bitterness whenever 
he enters upon the consideration of the conditions of man and 
his destmy. On these occasions, almost as in the writings of 
Cicero, although with less simplicity of diction,* the aspect of 

• Est enim aniraorara ingeniorumque naturale quoddam quasi pab 



198 COSMOS. 

the grand unity of nature is adduced as pzoductive of encour- 
agement and consolation to man. 

The conclusion of the Historia Naturalis of Pliny — the 
greatest Roman memorial transmitted to the literature of the 
Middle Ages — is composed in a true spirit of cosmical descrip- 
tion. It contains, in the condition in which we have possessed 
it since 1831,* a brief consideration of the comparative natu- 
ral history of countries in different zones, a eulogium of South- 
ern Europe between the Mediterranean and the chain of the 
Alps, and a description in praise of the Hesperian sky, *' where 
the temperate and gentle mildness of the climate had," accord- 
ing to a dogma of the older Pythagoreans, " early hastened 
the liberation of mankind from barbarism." 

The influence of the Roman dommion as a constant element 
of union and fusion required the more urgently and forcibly to 
be brought forward in a history of the contemplation of the 
universe, since we are able to recognize the traces of this in 
fluence in its remotest consequences even at a period when 
the bond of political union had become less compact, and waa 
even partially destroyed by the inroads of barbarians. Clau- 
dian, who stands forth in the decline of literature during the 
latter and more disturbed age of Theodosius the Great and 
his sons, distinguished for the endowment of a revived poetic 
productiveness, still sings, in too highly laudatory strains, of 
the dominion of the Romans.! 

H(BC est, in gremium victos quce sola recepit, 
Humanumque genus communi nomine fovit, 
Matris, nan domince, ritu ; civesque vocavit 
Quos domuit, nexuque pio longinqua revinxit. 
Hujus pacijicis debemns moribus omnes 
Q,uod veluti patHis regionibus utitur hospes. . . . 

External means of constraint, artificially-arranged civil in- 
stitutions, and long-continued servitude, might certainly tend 
to unite nations by destroying the individual existence of each 
one ; but the feeling of the unity and common condition of 
the whole human race, and of the equal rights of all men, has 
a nobler origin, and is based on the internal promptings of the 

ulum consideratio conteraplatioque naturae. Erigimur, elatiores fieri 
videmur, humana despicimus, cogitantesque supera atque coelestia htec 
nostra, ut exigiia et minima, conteranimus." (Cic, Acad., ii., 41.) 

* Plin., xxxvii., 13 (ed. Sillig.. t. v., 1836, p. 320). All earlier edi- 
tions closed with the words *' Hispaniam qnacunque ambitur mrri.** 
The conclusion of the work was discovered in 1831, in a Bamberg C*" 
dex, by Herr Ludwig v. Jan, professor at Schweinfurt. 

t Claudian, in Secundum Consulatum Siillichonis, v. 150~155. 



INFLUENCE OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 199 

Bpiiit and on the force of religious convictions. Christianity 
has materially contributed to call forth this idea of the unity 
of the human race, and has thus tended to exercise a favor- 
able influence on the hunuinization of nations in their morals, 
manners, and institutions. Although closely interwoven with 
the earliest doctrines of Christianity, this idea of humanity 
met with only a slow and tardy recognition ; for at the time 
when the new faith was raised at Byzantium, from political 
motives, to be the established religion of the state, its adher- 
ents were already deeply involved in miserable party dissen- 
sions, while intercourse with distant nations was impeded, and 
the foundations of the empire were shaken in many directions 
by external assaults* Even the personal freedom of entire 
races of men long found no protection in Christian states from 
ecclesiastical land-owners and corporate bodies. 

Such unnatural impediments, and many others which stand 
in the way of the intellectual advance of mankind and the 
ennoblement of social institutions, will all gradually disappear. 
The principle of individual and political freedom is implanted 
in the ineradicable conviction of the equal rights of one sole 
human race. Thus, as I have already remarked,* mankind 
presents itself to our contemplation as one great fraternity and 
as one independent unity, striving for the attainment of one 
aim — the free development of moral vigor. This considera- 
tion of humanity, or, rather, of the tendency toward it, which, 
sometimes checked, and sometimes advancing with a rapid 
and powerful progressive movement — and by no means a dis- 
covery of recent times — belongs, by the generalizing influence 
of its direction, most specially to that which elevates and 
animates cosmical life. In delineating the great epoch of the 
history of the universe, which includes the dominion of the 
Romans and the laws which they promulgated, together with 
the beginning of Christianity, it would have been impossible 
not to direct special attention to the manner in which the 
religion of Christ enlarged these views of mankind, and to 
the mild and long-enduring, although slowly-operating, influ- 
ence which it exercised on general, intellectual, moral, and 
social development. 

• See vol. i., p. 358 ; and compare, also, Wilhelm von Humboldt 
Kj&amp;er die Kav^iSprache, bd. i., s. xxxviiL 



200 



COSMOS. 



INVASION OF THE ARABS.— INTELLECTUAL APTITUDE OF THIS BRANCH 
OF THE SEMITIC RACES.— INFLUENCE OF FOREIGN ELEMENTS ON 
THE DEVELOPMENT OF EUROPEAN CULTURE.— THE INDIVIDUALITY 
OF THE NATIONAL CHARACTi^R OF THE ARABS.— TENDENCY TO A 
COMMUNION W^ITH NATURE AND PHYSICAL FORCES.-MEDICINE AND 
CHEMISTRY— EXTENSION OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY— ASTRONOMY 
AND MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES IN THE INTERIOR OF CONTINENTS 

In the preceding sketch of the history of the physical con 
templation of the universe we have already considered four 
principal momenta in the gradual development of the recog- 
nition of the unity of nature, viz. : 

1 . The attempts made to penetrate ftom. the basin of the 
Mediterranean eastward to the Euxine and Phasis ; south- 
ward to Ophir and the tropical gold lands; and westward, 
through the Pillars of Hercules, into the " all-encircling 
ocean." 

2. The Macedonian campaign under Alexander the Great 

3. The age of the Ptolemies. 

4. The universal dominion of the Romans. 

We now, therefore, proceed to consider the important influ- 
ence exercised on the general advancement of the physical and 
mathematical sciences, first, by the admixture of the foreign 
elements of Arabian culture with European civilization, and, 
six or seven centuries later, by the maritime discoveries of the 
Portuguese and Spaniards ; and likewise their influence on 
the knowledge of the earth and the regions of space, with re- 
spect to form and measurement, and to the heterogeneous 
nature of matter, and the forces inherent in it. The dis- 
covery and exploration of the New Continent, through the 
range of its volcanic Cordilleras and its elevated plateaux, 
where climates are ranged in strata, as it were, above one 
another, and tlie development of vegetation within 120 de- 
grees of latitude, undoubtedly indicates the period which has 
presented, in the shortest period of time, the greatest abund- 
ance of new physical observations to the human mind. 

From this period, the extension of cosmical knowledge 
ceased to be associated with separate and locally-defined polit- 
ical occurrences. Great inventions now first emanated from 
spontaneous intellectual power, and were no longer solely 
excited by the influence of separate external causes. The 
human mind, acting simultaneously in several directions, 
created, by new combinations of thought, new organs, by 
which the human eve could alike scrutinize the remote re- 



THE ARABS. 201 

gions of space, and the delicate tissues of anirnal and vege 
table structures, which serve as the very substratum of life. 
Thus the whole of the seventeenth century, whose commence- 
ment was brilliantly signalized by the great discovery of the 
telescope, together with the immediate results by which it was 
attended — from Galileo's observation of Jupiter's satellites, 
of the crescentic form of the disk of Venus, and the spots on 
the sun, to the theory of gravitation discovered by Newton — 
ranks as the most important epoch of a newly-created physical 
astronomy. This period constitutes, therefore, from the unity 
of the efforts made toward the observation of the heavenly 
bodies, and in mathematical investigations, a sharply-defin- 
ed section in the great process of intellectual development, 
which, since then, has been characterized by an uninterrupt- 
ed progress. 

In more recent times, the difficulty of signalizing separate 
momenta increases in proportion as human activity becomes 
more variously directed, and as the new order of social and 
political relations binds all the various branches of science in 
one closer bond of union. In some few sciences, whose devel- 
opment has been considered in the history of the physical con- 
templation of the universe, as, for instance, in chemistry and 
descriptive botany, individual periods may be instanced, even 
in the most recent time, in which great advancement has been 
rapidly made, or new views suddenly opened ; but, in the his- 
tory of the contemplation of the universe, which, from its very 
nature, must be limited to the consideration of those facts re- 
garding separate branches of science which most directly relate 
to the extension of the idea of the Cosmos considered as one 
natural whole, the connection of definite epochs becomes im- 
practicable, since that which we have named the process of 
intellectual development presupposes an uninterrupted simul- 
taneous advance in all spheres of cosmical knowledge. At 
this important point of separation between the downfall of the 
universal dominion of the Romans and the introduction of a 
new and foreign element of civilization by means of the first 
direct contact of our continent with the land of the tropics, it 
appears desirable that we should throw a general glance over 
the path on which we arc about to enter. 

The Arabs, a people of Semitic origin, partially dispelled 
the barbarism which had shrouded Europe lor upward of two 
hundred years after the storms by which it had been shaken, 
from the aggressions of hostile nations. The Arabs lead ua 
back to the imperishable sources of Greek philosophy ; and 

12 



202 COSMOS. 

besides the influence thus exercised on scientific cultivation, 
they have also extended and opened new paths in the donnain 
of natural investigation. In our continent these disturbing 
Btorms bega.^ under Valentinian I., when the Auns (of Finn- 
ish, not Mongolian origin) penetrated beyond the Don in the 
closing part of the fourth century, and subdued, first the Alani, 
and subsequently, with their aid, the Ostrogoths. In the re- 
mote parts of Eastern Asia, the stream of migratory nations 
had already been moved in its onward course for several cen- 
turies before our era. The first impulse was given, as we 
have already remarked, by the attack of the Hiungnu, a 
Turkish race, on the fair-haired and blue-eyed Usuni, prob- 
ably of Indo-Germanic origin, who bordered on the Yueti 
(Geti), and dwelt in the upper river valley of the Hoang-ho, 
in the northwest of China. The devastating stream of mi- 
gration directed from the great wall of China, which was 
erected as a protection against the inroads of the Hiungnu (214 
B.C.), flowed on through Central Asia, north of the chain of 
the Celestial Mountains. These Asiatic hordes were unin- 
fluenced by any religious zeal before they entered Europe, and 
some writers have even attempted to show that the Moguls 
were not as yet Buddhists when they advanced victoriously to 
Poland and Silesia.* Wholly different relations imparted a 
peculiar character to the warlike aggressions of a more southern 
race — the Arabs. 

Remarkable for its form, and distinguished as a detached 
branch of the slightly-articulated continent of Asia, is situated 
the peninsula of Arabia, between the Red Sea and the Persian 
Gulf, the Euphrates and the Syro-Mediterranean Sea.t It is 
the most western of the three peninsulas of Southern Asia, 

* If, as has often been asserted, Charles Martel, by his victory at 
Tours, protected Central Europe against the Mussulman invasion, it can 
not be maintained, with equal justice, that the retreat of the Moguls 
after the battle of Liegnitz prevented Buddhism from penetrating to 
the shores of the Elbe and the Rhine. The Mongolian battle, which 
was fought in the plain of Wahlstatt, near Liegnitz, and in which Duke 
Henry the Pious fell fighting bravely, took place on the 9th of April, 
1241, four years after Kaptschak (Kamtschatka) and Russia became sub- 
ject to the Asiatic horde, under Batu, the grandson of Genghis Khan. 
But the earliest introduction of Buddhism among the Mongolians took 
place in the year 1247, when, in the east at Leang-tscheu, in the Chi- 
nese province of Schensi, the sick Mongolian prince Godan caused the 
Sakya Pandita, a Tliibetian archbishop, to be sent for, in order to cure 
and convert him. (Klaproth, in a MS. fragment, *' Ueber die Verbreitung 
de» Bttddhismus im ostlichen und nordlicken Asien.^') The Mongolians 
have never occupied themselves with the conversion of conquered na» 
tions. t See w^ i., p. 291. 



THE ARABS. HO^ 

tind its vicinity to Egypt, and to a European sea-basin, gives 
it signal advantages in a political no less than a commercial 
point of view. In the central parts of the Arabian Peninsula 
lived the* tribe of the Hedschaz, a noble and valiant race, un- 
learned, but not wholly rude, imaginative, and, at the same 
time, devoted to the careful observation of all the processes of 
free nature manifested in the ever-serene vault of heaven and 
on the surface of the earth. This people, after having con- 
tinued for thousands of years almost without contact with the 
rest of the world, and advancing chiefly in nomadic hordes, 
suddenly burst forth from their former mode of life, and, ac- 
quiring cultivation from the mental contact of the inhabitants 
of more ancient seats of civilization, converted and subjected 
to their dominion the nations dwelling between the Pillars of 
Hercules and the Indus, to the point where the Bolor chain 
intersects the Hindoo-Coosh. They maintained relations of 
commerce as early as the middle of the ninth century simul- 
taneously with the northern countries of Europe, with Mada- 
gascar, Eastern Africa, India, and China ; diffused languages, 
jfioney, and Indian numerals, and founded a powerful and 
*.ong-enduring communion of lands united together by one 
common religion. In these migratory advances great prov- 
inces were often only temporarily occupied. The swarming 
hordes, threatened by the natives, only rested for a while, ac- 
sording to the poetical diction of their own historians, " like 
groups of clouds which the winds ere long will scatter abroad." 
No other migratory movement has presented a more striking 
and instructive character ; and it would appear as if the de- 
pressive influence manifested in circumscribing mental vigor, 
and which was apparently inherent in Islamism, acted less 
powerfully on the nations under the dominion of the Arabs 
than on Turkish races. Persecution for the sake of religion 
was here, as every where, even among Christians, more the 
result of an unbounded, dogmatizing despotism than the con- 
sequence of any original form of belief or any religious con- 
templation existing among the people. The anathemas of 
the Koran are especially directed against superstition and the 
worship of idols among races of Aramseic descent.^ 

* Hence the contrast between the tyrannical measures of Motewek 
kil, the tenth calif of the house of the Abbassides, against Jews and 
Christians (Joseph von Hanamer, Ueber die Ldnderverwalinng unter dem 
Chalifate, 183.5, 8. 27, 85, und 117), and the n^ild tolerance of wiser 
rulers in Spain (Cpnde, Hist, de la Dominacion de los Arabes en Espana, 
t. i., 1820, p. 67). It should also be remembered that Omar, after the 
taking of Jerusalem, tolerated every rite of Christian worship, and con« 



204 COSMOS. 

As the life of nations is, independently of mental culture, 
determined by many external conditions of soil, climate, and 
vicinity to the sea, we must here remember the great varie- 
ties presented by the Arabian peninsula. Although the first 
impulse toward the changes effected by the Arabs in the 
three continents emanated from the Ismaelitish Hedschaz, and 
owed its principal force to one sole race of herdsmen, the lit- 
toral portions of the peninsula had continued for thousands of 
years open to intercourse with the rest of the world. In or- 
der to understand the connection and existence of great and 
singular occurrences, it is necessary to ascend to the primitive 
causes by which they have been gradually prepared. 

Toward the southwest, on the Erythrean Sea, lies Yemen, 
the ancient seat of civilization (of Saba), the beautiful, fruit- 
ful, and richly-cultivated land of the Joctanidee.* It produced 
incense (the lehonah of the Hebrews, perhaps the Boswellia 
thurifera of Colebrooke),t myrrh (a species of Amyris, first ac- 

cluded a treaty with the patriarch favorable to the Christians. {Fund- 
gruben des Orients, bd. v., s. 68.) 

* It would apjiear iVorn tradition that a branch of the Hebrews mi- 
grated to Southern Arabia, under the name of Jokthan (Qachthan), be- 
fore the time of Abraham, and there founded flourishing kingdom*. 
(Ewald, Geschichte des Volkes Israel, bd. i., s. 337 und 450.) 

t The tree which furnishes the Arabian incense of Hadramaut, cele 
brated from the earliest times, aud which is never to be found in tho 
island of Socotora, has not yet been discovered and determined by any 
botanist, not even by the laborious investigator Ehrenberg. An article 
similar to this incense is fouud in Eastern India, and particularly in 
Bundelcund, and is exported in considemWe quantities from Bombay 
to China. This Indian incense is obtained, according to Colebrooke 
{Asiatic Researches, vol. ix., p. 377), from a plant made known by Rox- 
burgh, Boswellia thurifera or serrata (included in Kunth's family oi Bur- 
seracece). As, from the very ancient commercial connections between 
the coasts of Southern Arabia and Western India (Gildemeister, Scrip- 
lorum Arabum Loci de Rebus Indicts, p. 35), doubts might be enter- 
tained as to whether the lidavoc of Theophrastus (the thus of the Ro- 
mans) belonged originally to the Arabian peninsula, Lassen's remark 
{Indische Alterthumskunde, bd. i., s. 286), that incouse is called '^ yd- 
ioana, Javanese, i. e., Arabian," in Amara-Koscha, itself becomes very 
important, apparently implying that this product is brought to India 
from Arabia. It is called Turuschka^ pindaka' sihld (three names sig- 
nifying incense) " ydwano " in Amara-Koscha. (Amarakocka, pubi. par 
A. Loiseleur Deslongchamps, Part i., 1839, p. 156.) Dioscorides also 
distinguishes Arabian from Indian incense. Carl Ritter, in his excel- 
lent monograph on the kinds of incense {Asien, bd. viii., abth. i., s. 
356-372,) remarks very justly, that, from the similarity of climate, this 
species of plant {Boswellia thurifera) might be diSused frotn India 
tlu'ough the south of Persia to Arabia. The American incense {Oliba- 
nvm Americanum of our Pharmacopaeias) is obtained from Icica gnjar 
nensis, Aubl., and Icica iacamahaca, which BQnpland aud myself fre' 



THE ARABS 205 

curately described by Ehrenberg), and the so-called balsam of 
Mecca (the Balsamodendron Gileadense of Kunth). These 
products constituted an important branch of commerce be- 
tween the contiguous tribes and the Egyptians, Persians, and 
Indians, as well as the Greeks and Romans ; and it was 
owing to their abundance and luxuriance that the country 
acquired the designation of "Arabia Felix," which occurs as 
early as in the writings of Diodorus and Strabo. In the 
southeast of the peninsula, on the Persian Gulf, and opposite 
the Phoenician settlements of Aradus and Tylus, lay Gerrha, 
an important emporium for Indian articles of commerce. 

Although the greater part of the interior of Arabia may be 
termed a barren, treeless, and sandy waste, we yet meet in 
Oman, between Jaiian and Basna, with a whole range of 
well-cultivated oases, irrigated by subterranean canals ; and 
we are indebted to the meritorious activity of the traveler 
Wellsted for the knowledge of three mountain chains, of which 
the highest and wood-crowned summit, named Dschebel-Akh- 
dar, rises six thousand feet above the level of the sea near 
Maskat.* In the hilly country of Yemen, east of Loheia, and 
in the littoral range of Hedschaz, in Asyr, and also to the east 
of Mecca, at Tayef, there are elevated plateaux, whose perpet- 
ually low temperature was known to the geographer Edrisi.t 

The same diversity of mountain landscape characterizes the 
peninsula of Sinai, the Copper-land of the Egyptians of the 
old kingdom (before the time of the Hyksos), and the stony 
valleys of Petra. I have already elsewhere spoken of the 
Phoenician commercial settlements on the most northern por- 
tion of the Red Sea, and of the expeditions to Ophir under 
Hiram and Solomon, which started from Ezion-Geber.| Ara- 
bia, and the neighboring island of Socotora (the island of Di 
oscorides), inhabited by Indian colonists, participated in the 

quently found growing on the vast grassy plains (llanos) of Calaboso, in 
South America. Idea, like BosweUia, belongs to the family of Burse- 
racecB. 

The red pine {Pinus abies, Linn.) produces the common incense of 
our churches. The plant which bears myrrh, and which Bruce thought 
he had seen (Ainslie, Materia Medica of Hindostan, Madras, 1813, p. 
29), has been discovered by Ehrenberg near el-Gisan in Arabia, and 
has been described by Nees von Esenbeck, from the specimens col- 
lected by him, under the name of Balsamodendron myrrha. The Balsa- 
modendron Kotaf of Kunth, an Amyris of Forskaal, was long errone- 
ously regarded as the true myrrh-tree. 

* Wellsted, Travels in Arabia, 1838, vol. i., p. 272-289. 

t Jomard, Etudes G6ogr. et Hist, sur I' Arabic, 1839, p. 14 and 32. 

t See ante. p. 13C. 



806 COSMOS 

universal traffic with India and the eastern coasts of Africa. 
The natural products of these countries were interchanged for 
those of Hadramaut and Yemen. *' All they from Sheba 
shall come," sings the Prophet Isaiah of the dromedaries of 
Midian ; " they shall bring gold and incense."* Petra was 
the emporium for the costly wares destined for Tyre and Sidon, 
and the principal settlement of the Nabatsei, a people once 
mighty in commerce, whose primitive seat is supposed by the 
philologist Quatremere to have been situated among the Ger- 
rhcean Mountains, on the Lower Euphrates. This northern 
portion of Arabia maintained an active connection with other 
civilized states, from its vicinity to Egypt, the diffusion of 
Arabian tribes over the Syro-Palestinian boundaries and the 
districts around the Euphrates, as well as by means of the 
celebrated caravan track from Damascus through Emesa and 
Tadmor (Palmyra) to Babylon. Mohammed himself, who 
had sprung from a noble but impoverished family of the Ko- 
reischite tribe, in his mercantile occupation, visited, before he 
appeared as an inspired prophet and reformer, the fair at Bosra 
on the Syrian frontier, that at Hadramaut, the land of incense, 
and more particularly that held at Okadh, near Mecca, which 
continued during twenty days, and whither poets, mostly Bed- 
ouins, assembled annually, to take part in the lyric competi- 
tions. I mention these individual facts referring to interna- 
tional relations of commerce, and the causes from which they 
emanated, in order to give a more animated picture of the 
circumstances which conduced to prepare the way for a uni- 
versal change. 

The spread of Arabian population toward the north reminds 
us most especially of two events, which, notwithstanding the 
obscurity in which their more immediate relations are shroud- 
ed, testify that even thousands of years before Mohammed, 
the inhabitants of the peninsula had occasionally taken part 
in the great universal traffic, both toward the West and East, 
in the direction of Egypt and of the Euphrates. The Semitic 
or Aramaeic origin of the Hyksos, who put an end to the old 
kingdom under the twelfth dynasty, two thousand two hund- 
red years before our era, is now almost universally admitted 
by all historians. Even Manetho says, " Some maintain that 
these herdsmen were Arabians." Other authorities call them 
PhoBuicians, a term which was extended in antiquity to the 
inhabitants of the Valley of the Jordan, and to all Arabian 
races. The acute Ewald refers especially tc the Amalekites, 
* Isaiah, ch. Ix., v. 6. 



THE ARABS. 207 

ivho originally lived in Yemen, and then spread themselvea 
beyond Mecca and Medina to Canaan and Syria, appearing 
in the Arabian annals as rulers over Egypt in the time of Jo- 
seph.* It seems extraordinary that the nomadic races of the 
Hyksos should have been able to subdue the ancient powerful 
and well-organized kingdom of the Egyptians. Here the more 
freely-constituted nation entered into a successful contest with 
another long habituated to servitude, but yet the victorious 
Arabian immigrants were not then, as in more modern times, 
inspired by religious enthusiasm. The Hyksos, actuated by 
fear of the Assyrians (races of Arpaschschad), established their 
festivals and place of arms at Avaris, on the eastern arm of 
the Nile. This circumstance seems to indicate attempted ad- 
vances on the part of hostile warlike bodies, and a great mi- 
gration westward. A second event, which occurred probably 
a thousand years later, is mentioned by Diodorus on the au- 
thority of Ctesias.1 Ariasus, a powerful prince of the Himy- 
arites, entered into an alliance with Ninus, on the Tigris, and 
after they had conjointly defeated the Babylonians, he returned 
laden with rich spoils to his home in Southern Arabia.! 

Although a free pastoral mode of life may be regarded as 
predominating in the Hedschaz, and as constituting that of a 
great and powerful majority, the cities of Medina and of Mec- 
ca, with its ancient and mysterious temple holiness, the Kaa- 
ba, are mentioned as important places, much frequented by 
foreigners. It is probable that the complete and savage wild- 
ness generated by isolation was unknown in those districts 
which we term river valleys, and which were contiguous to 
coasts or to caravansery tracks. Gibbon, who knew so well 
how to consider the conditions of human life, draws attention 
to the essential differences existing between a nomadic life in 
the Arabian peninsula and that described by Herodotus and 
Hippocrates, in the so-called land of the Scythians, since in 
the latter region no portion of the pastoral people ever settled 

* Ewald, Gesch. des Volkes Israel, bd. i., s. 300 und 450; Bunsen, 
^gypten, buch iii., s. 10 uud 32. The traditions of Medes and Per- 
Bians in Northern Africa indicate very ancient migrations toward the 
West. They have been connected w^ith the various versions of the 
myth of Hercules, and with the Phoenician Melkarth. (Compare Sal 
lust, Bellum Jugurth., cap. 18, drawn from Punic writings by Hiempsali 
and Pliny, v. 8.) Strabo even terms the Maurusians (inhabitants of 
Mauritania) " Indians who had come with Hercules." 

t Diod. Sic, lib. ii , cap. 2 and 3. 

X Ctesicp, Cnidii Oj^erum ReliquicB, ed. Baehr, Fragmenta Assyriaca, 
p. 421; and Carl MUUer, in Diudorf's edition of Herodotus (Par., 1844). 
p. 13-15. 



208 COSMOS. 

in cities, while in. the great Arabian peninsula the countit, 
people still hold communion with the inhabitants of the towns, 
whom they regard as of the same origin as themselves.* In 
the Kirghis steppe, a portion of the plain inLabited by the 
ancient Scythians (the Scoloti and Sacae), and which exceeds 
in extent the area of Germany, there has never been a city 
for thousands of years, and yet, at the time of my journey in 
Siberia, the number of the tents ( Yurti or Kibitkes) occupied 
by the three nomadic hordes exceeded 400,000, which would 
give a population of 2, 000, 000. t It is hardly necessary to 
enter more circumstantially into the consideration of the efiect 
produced on mental culture by such great contrasts in the 
greater or less isolation of a nomadic life, even where equaJ 
mental qualifications are presupposed. 

In the more highly-gifted race of the Arabs, natural adapt 
ability for mental cultivation, the geographical relations we 
have already indicated, and the ancient commercial intercourse 
of the littoral districts with the highly-civilized neighboring 
states, all combine to explain hov/ the irruption into Syria and 
Persia, and the subsequent possession of Egypt, were so speed- 
ily able to awaken in the conquerors a love for science and a 
tendency to the pursuit of independent observation. It was 
ordained in the wonderful decrees by which the course of 
events is regulated, that the Christian sects of Nestorians, 
which exercised a very marked influence on the geographical 
diffiision of knowledge, should prove of use to the Arabs even 
before they advanced to the erudite and contentious city of 
Alexandria, and that, protected by the armed followers of the 
creed of Islam, these Nestorian doctrines of Christianity were 
enabled to penetrate far into Eastern Asia. The Arabs were 
first made acquainted with Greek literature through the Syr- 
ians, a kindred Semitic race, who had themselves acquired a 
knowledge of it only about a hundred and fifty years earlier 
through the heretical Nestorians 4 Physicians, who had been 
educated in the scholastic establishments of the Greeks, and 
in the celebrated school of medicine founded by the Nestorian 
Christians at Edessa in Mesopotamia, were settled at Mecca 
as early as Mohammed's time, and there lived on a footing of 
friendly intercourse with the Prophet and Abu-Bekr. 

• Gibbon, Hist, of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, vol 
ix., chap. 50, p. 200 (Leips., 1829). 

t Humboldt, Asie Centr., t. ii., p. 128. 

X Jourdain, Recherches Critiques siir VA^e des Traductions d' Ariatot^ 
1819, p. 81 and 87. 



THE ARABS. 209 

The school of Edessa, a prototype of the Beuedictino schools 
of Monte Cassino and Salerno, gave the first impulse to a sci- 
entific investigation of remedial agents yielded from the min- 
eral and vegetable kingdoms. When these establishments 
were dissolved by Christian fanaticism, under Zeno the Isau- 
rian, the Nestorians were scattered over Persia, where they 
soon attained to political importance, and founded at Dschon- 
disapur, in Khusistan, a medical school, which was afterward 
much frequented. They succeeded, toward the middle of the 
seventh century, in extending their knowledge and their doc- 
trines as far as China, under the Thang dynasty, 512 years 
after Buddhism had penetrated thither from India. 

The seeds of Western civilization, which had been scatter- 
ed over Persia by learned monks and by the philosophers of 
the last Platonic school at Athens, persecuted by Justinian, 
had exercised a beneficial influence on the Arabs during their 
first Asiatic campaigns. However faint the sparks of knowl- 
edge diffused by the Nestorian priesthood might have been, 
their peculiar tendency to the investigation of medical phar- 
macy could not fail to influence a race which had so lone 
lived in the enjoyment of a free communion with nature, and 
which preserved a more vivid feeling for every kind of natural 
investigation than the Greek and Italian inhabitants of cities. 
The cosmical importance attached to the age of the Arabs 
depends in a great measure on the national characteristics 
which we are here considering. The Arabs, I would again re- 
mark, are to be regarded as the actual founders of physical sci- 
ence, considered in the sense which we now apply to the words. 

It is undoubtedly extremely difficult to associate any abso- 
lute beginning with any definite epoch of time in the history 
of the mental world and of the intimately-connected elements 
of thought. Individual luminous points of knowledge, and 
the processes by which knowledge was gradually attained, 
may be traced scattered through very early periods of time. 
How great is the difference that separates Dioscorides, who 
distilled mercury from cinnabar, from the Arabian chemist 
Dscheber ; how widely is Ptolemy, as an optician, removed 
from Alhazen ; but we must, nevertheless, date the founda- 
tion of the physical sciences, and even of natural science, from 
the point where new paths were first trodden by many differ- 
ent investigators, although with unequal success. To the mere 
contemplation of nature, to the observation of the phenomena 
accidentally presented to the eye in the terrestrial and celes- 
tial regions of space, succeeds investigation lu to the actual, an 



2M0 COSMOS. 

estimate by the measurement of magnitudes and the duration 
of motion. The earliest epoch of such a species of natural ob- 
servation, although principally limited to organic substances, 
was the age of Aristotle. There remains a third and higher 
stage in the progressive advancement of the knowledge of 
physical phenomena, which embraces an investigation into 
natural forces, and the powers by which these forces are en- 
abled to act, in order to be able to bring the substances liber- 
ated into new combinations. The means by which this lib- 
eration is effected are experiments, by which phenomena may 
be called forth at will. 

The last-named stage of the process of knowledge, which 
was almost wholly disregarded in antiquity, was raised by the 
Arabs to a high degree of development. This people belong- 
ed to a country which enjoyed, throughout its whole extent, 
the climate of the region of palms, and in its greater part that 
of tropical lands (the tropic of Cancer intersecting the penin- 
sula in the direction of a line running from Maskat to Mecca), 
and this portion of the world was therefore characterized by 
the highly-developed vital force pervading vegetation, by which 
an abundance of aromatic and balsamic juices was yielded to 
man from various beneficial and deleterious vegetable sub- 
stances. The attention of the people must early have been 
directed to the natural products of their native soil, and those 
brought as articles of commerce from the accessible coasts of 
Malabar, Ceylon, and Eastern Africa. In these regions of the 
torrid zone, organic forms become individualized within very 
limited portions of space, each one being characterized by in- 
dividual products, and thus increasing the communion of men 
with nature by a constant excitement toward natural observ- 
tttion. Hence arose the wish to distinguish carefully from one 
another these precious articles of commerce, which were so 
important to medicine, to manufactures, and to the pomp of 
temples and palaces, and to discover the native region of each, 
which was often artfully concealed from motives of avarice. 
Starting from the staple emporium of Gerrha, on the Persian 
Gulf, and from Yemen, the native district of incense, numer- 
ous caravan tracks intersected the whole interior of the Ara- 
bian peninsula to Phoenicia and Syria, and thus every where 
diffused a taste for and a knowledge of the names of these 
powerful natural products. 

The science of medicine, which was founded by Dioscoridea 
in the school of Alexandria, when considered with reference to 
Its scientific development, is essentially a creation of the Arabs, 



THE ARABS. 211 

to whom the oldest, and, at the same time, one of the richest 
sources of knowledge, that of the Indian physicians, had been 
early opened.* Chemical pharmacy was created by the Arabs, 
while to them are likewise due the first official prescriptions 
regarding the preparation and admixture of different remedial 
agents — the dispensing recipes of the present day. These 
were subsequently diffused over the south of Europe by the 
school of Salerno. Pharmacy and Materia Medica, the first 
requirements of practical medicine, led simultaneously, in two 
directions, to the study of botany and to that of chemistry. 
From its narrow sphere of utility and its limited apphcation, 
botany gradually opened a wider and freer field, comprehend- 
ing investigations into the structure of organic tissues and 
their connection with vital forces, and into the laws by which 
vegetable forms are associated in families, and may be distin« 
guished geographically according to diversities of climate and 
differences of elevation above the earth's surface. 

From the time of the Asiatic conquests, for the mainte- 
nance of which Bagdad subsequently constituted a central point 
of power and civilization, the Arabs spread themselves, in the 
short space of seventy years, over Egypt, Cyrene, and Car- 
thage, through the whole of Northern Asia to the far remote 
western peninsula of Iberia. The inconsiderable degree of 
cultivation possessed by the people and their leaders might 
certainly incline us to expect every demonstration of rude bar 
barism ; but the mythical account of the burning of the Alex 
andrian Library by Amru, including the account of its appli- 
cation, during six months, as fuel to heat 4000 bathing rooms, 
rests on the sole testimony of two writers who lived 580 years 
after the alleged occurrence took place. f We need not here 
describe how, in more peaceful times, during the brilliant 
epoch of Al-Mansur, Haroun Al-Raschid, Mamun, and Mota- 
sem, the courts of princes, and public scientific institutions, 
were enabled to draw together large numbers of the most dis- 
tinguished men, although without imparting a freer develop- 

* Oq the knowledge which the Arabs derived from the Hindoos re- 
garding the Materia Medica, see Wilson's important investigations in the 
Oriental Magazine of Calcutta, 1823, February and March ; and those 
of Royle, in his Essay on the Antiquity of Hindoo Medicine, 1837, p. 56- 
59, 64-66, 73, and 92. Compare an account of Arabic pharmaceutical 
writings, translated lirom Hindostanee, in Ainslie (Madras edition), p. 
289. 

t Gibbon, vol. ix., chap, li., p. 392 ; Heeren. Gesch. des Studiums det 
Classischen Litteratnr, bd. i., 1797, s, 44 und 72; Sacy, Abd-Allatif, p 
240 ; Parthey, Das Alexandrinische Museum, 1838. s. 106. 



*il2 COSMOB. 

ment to the xnental culture of the mass of the people, li is 
not my object in the present work to give a characteristic 
sketch of the far-extended and variously-developed literature 
of the Arabs, or to distinguish the elements that spring from 
the hidden depths of the organization of races, and the natu- 
ral unfolding of their character, from those which are owing to 
external inducements and accidental controlling causes. The 
solution of this important problem belongs to another sphere ol 
ideas, while our historical considerations are limited to a frag- 
mentary enumeration of the various elements which have con- 
tributed, in mathematical, astronomical, and physical science, 
toward the diffusion of a more general contemplation of the 
universe among the Arabs. 

Alchemy, magic, and mystic fancies, deprived by scholastic 
phraseology of all poetic charm, corrupted here, as elsewhere, 
in thet Middle Ages, the true results of inquiry ; but still the 
Arabs have enlarged the views of nature, and given origin to 
many new elements of knowledge, by their indefatigable and 
independent labors, while, by means of careful translations into 
their own tongue, they have appropriated to themselves the 
fruits of the labors of earlier cultivated generations. Atten- 
tion has been justly drawn to the great difference existing in 
the relations of civilization between immigrating Germanic 
and Arabian races. ^ The former became cultivated after their 
immigration; the latter brought with them from their na- 
tive country not only their religion, but a highly-polished lan- 
guage, and the graceful blossoms of a poetry which has not 
been wholly devoid of influence on the Proven9als and Minne- 
singers. 

The Arabs possessed remarkable qualifications alike for ap- 
propriating to themselves, and again diffusing abroad, the seeds 
of knowledge and general intercourse, from the Euphrates to 
the Guadalquivir, and to the south of Central Africa. They 
exhibited an unparalleled mobility of character, and a tenden- 
cy to amalgamate with the nations whom they conquered, 
wholly at variance with the repelling spirit of the Israelitish 
castes, while, at the same time, they adhered to their national 
character, and the traditional recollections of their original 
home, notwithstanding their constant change of abode. No 
other race presents us with more striking examples of extens- 
ive land journeys, undertaken by private individuals, not only 
for purposes of trade, but also with the view of collecting in- 

* Heiurich Ritter, Gesch. dee Christlicken Philosophie, th. iii., 1844, 
0. 669-676. 



THE ARABS. ^ 213 

formation, surpassing in these respects the travels of the Bud^ 
dhist priests of Thibet and China, Marco Polo, "and the Chris- 
tian missionaries, who were sent on an embassy to the Mon- 
golian princes. Important elements of Asiatic knowledge 
reached Europe through the intimate relations existing be- 
tween the Arabs and the natives of India and China (for at 
the close of the seventh century, under the califate of the 
Ommajades, the Arabs had already extended their conquests 
to Kaschgar, Kabul, and the Punjaub).* The acute investi- 
gations of Reinaud have taught us the amount of knowledge 
regarding India that may be derived from Arabian sources. 
The incursion of the Moguls into China certainly disturbed 
the intercourse with the nations beyond the Oxus, but the 
Moguls soon served to extend the international relations of the 
Arabs, from the light thrown on geography by their observa- 
tions and careful investigations, from the coasts of the Dead 
Sea to those of Western Africa, and from the Pyrenees to 
Scherif Edrisi's marsh lands of Wangarah, in the interior of 
Africa.t According to the testimony of Frahn, Ptolemy's ge- 
ography was translated into Arabic by order of the Calif Ma- 
mun, between the years 813 and 833 ; and it is not improba- 
ble that several fragments of Marinus Tyrius, which have not 
come down to us, were employed in this translation. $ 

Of the long series of remarkable geographers presented to 
us in the literature of the Arabs, it will be sufficient to name 
the first and last, El-Istachri and Alhassan (Johannes Leo 
Africanus).^ Geography never acquired a greater acquisition 

* Reinaud, in three late writings, which show how much may still 
be derived from Arabic and Persian, as well as Chinese sources ; Frag- 
ments Arabes et Persans in6dits relatifs a V Inde anUrieurement au Xle 
Siecle de Vere Chritienne, 1845, p. xx.-xxxiii. ; Relation des Voyages 
faits par les Arabes et les Persans dans f Inde et a la Chine dans le IXe 
Siecle de notre ere, 1845, t. i., p. xlvi. ; M6moire G6og. et Hist, sur VInde 
d^apris les icrivains Arabes. Persans, et Chinois, anterieurement an milieu, 
du onzieme Siecle de Vere Chretienjie, 1846, p. 6. The second of these 
memoirs of the learned Oriental scholar is based on the incomplete 
treatise of the Abbe Renaudot, Anciennes Relations des Indes, et de la 
Chine, de deux Voyageurs Mahometans, 1718. The Arabic manuscript 
contains only one notice of a voyage, that of the merchant Soleiman, 
who embarked on the Persian Gulf in the year 851. To this notice is 
added what Abu-Zeyd-Hassan, of Syraf, in Farsistan, who had never 
traveled to India or China, had learned from other well-informed mer- 
chants, t Reinaud et Fave, Du Feu Gr^geois, 1845, p. 200. 

X Ukert, Ueber Marinus Tyrius tind Ptolemans die Geographen, in the 
Rheinische Museum far Philologie, 1839, s. 329-332 ; Gildemeister, De 
Rebus Indicts, pars 1, 1838, p. 120 ; Asu Centrale, t. ii., p. 191. 

$ The " Oriental Geography of Ebn-Haukal," which Sir Williaro 



214 COSMOS. 

of facts, even from the discoveries of the Portuguese and Span- 
iards. Within fifty years after the death of the Prophet, the 
Arabs had already reached the extremest western coasts of 
Africa and the port of Asfi. Whethei the islands of the 
Guansches were visited by Arabian vessels subsequently, as I 
was long disposed to conjecture, to the expedition of the so- 
caJled Almagrurin adventurers to the Mare tenebrosum, is a 
question that has again been lately regarded as doubtful.* 
The presence of a great quantity of Arabian coins, found bur- 
ied in the lands of the Baltic, and in the extreme northern 
jiarts of Scandinavia, is not to be ascribed to direct inter- 
course with Arabian vessels in those regions, but to the wide- 
ly-diffused inland trade of the Arabs. f 

Geography was no longer limited to a representation of the 
relations of space, and the determinations of latitude and lon- 
gitude, which had been multiplied by Abul-Hassan, or to h 
description of river districts and mountain chains ; but it rath 
er led the people, already familiar with nature, to an acquaint- 
ance with the organic products of the soil, especially those of 
the vegetable world. $ The repugnance entertained by all tht 

Ouseley published in London in 1800, is that of Abu-Ishak el-Ist^chri, 
and, as Frahn has shown (Ibn Fozlan, p. ix., xxii., and 256-263), it 
half a century older than Ebn-Haukal. The maps which accompany 
the " Book of Climates'^ of the year 920, and of which there is a tine 
manuscript copy iu the library of Gotha, have afforded me much aid in 
my observations on the Caspian Sea and the Sea of Aral {Asie Centrale, 
t. ii., p. 192-196). We have lately been put in possession of an edition 
of IstAchri, and a German translation {Liber Climatum, ad similitudinem 
Codicis Oothani delineandum, cur. J. H. Moeller, Goth., 1839 ; Das 
Buck der Lander, translated from the Arabic by A. D. Mordtmann 
Hamb., 1845). 

* Compare Joaquim Jose da Costa de Macedo, Memoria em que se 
pretende provar que as Arabes nao conhecerao as Canarias antes doi 
Portuguezes (Lisboa, 1844, p. 86-99, 205-227, with Humboldt, Examen 
Crit. de V Hist, de la GiogravKie, t. ii., p. 137-141. 

t Leopold von Ledebur, Ueber die in den Ballischen Ldndern ge/un 
denen Zeugnisse eines Handels-Verkehrs mit dem Orient zur Zeit det 
Arabischen Weltherrschaft, 1840, s. 8 und 75. 

X The determinations of longitude which Abul-Hassan Ali of Moroc- 
co, an astronomer of the thirteenth century, has embodied in his work 
on the astronomical instruments of the Arabs, are all calculated from 
the first meridian of Arin. M. Sedillot the younger first directed tha 
attention of geographers to this meridian. I have also made it an ob- 
ject of careful inquiry, because Columbus, who was always guided bj 
Cardinal d'Ailly's Imago Mundi, in his fantasies regarding the differencs 
of form between the eastern and western hemispheres, makes mention 
of an Isla de Arin: "centre de el hemispherio del quel hablc Tolor&gt;ea 
y qu^s debaxo la linea equinoxial entre el Siuo Arabico y aeuel d« 
Persia." (Compare J. J. Sedillot, Trait4 des Instrumens Astronomique* 



THE ARABS. 215 

adherents of Islamism toward anatomical investigations im- 
peded their advance in zoology. They remained contented 
with that which they were able to appropriate to themselves 
from translations of the works of Aristotle and Galen ;* but, 

des Arabes, publ. par L. Am. Sedillot, t. i., 1834, p. 312-318 ; t. ii., 1835, 
preface, with Humboldt's Examen Crit. de VHist. de la Geogr., t. in., 
p. 64, and Asie Cenirale, t. iii., p. 593-596, in which the data occur 
which I derived from the Mappa Mundi of Alliacus of 1410, in the 
" Alphonsine Tables,''^ 1483, and in Madrignano's Itinerarium Portugal- 
lensiurn, 1508. ^ It is singular that Edrisi appears to know nothing of 
Khobbet Arin (Cancadora, more properly Kankder). Sedillot the 
younger (in the Mimoire sur les Systemes Giograpkiques des Grecs et des 
Arabes, 1842, p. 20-25) places the meridian of Arin in the group of the 
Azores, while the learned commentator of Abulfeda, Reinaud {Mimoire 
sur VInde anterieurement au Xle siecle de Vere Chritienne d^apres les 
€crivains Arabes et Persans, p. 20-24), assumes that " the word Arin 
has originated by confusion from Azyn, Ozein, and Odjein, an old seat of 
cultivation (according to Burnouf, Udjijayani in Malwa), the ^O^rjvij of 
Ptolemy. This Ozene was supposed to be in the meridian of Lanka, 
and in later times Arin was conjectured to be an island on the coast of 
Zanguebar. perhaps the Eoavvov of Ptolemy." Compare, also, Am. 
Sedillot, M6m. sur les Instr. Astron. des Arabes, 1841, p. 75. 

* The Calif Al-Mamun caused maily valuable Greek manuscripts to 
be purchased in Constantinople, Armenia, Syria, and Egypt, and to bo 
translated direct from Greek into Arabic, in consequence of the earlier 
Arabic versions having long been founded on Syrian translations ( Jour- 
dain, Recherches Crit. sur V Age etsur VOHgine des Traductions Latines 
d'Aristote, 1819, p. 85, 88, and 226). Much has thus been rescued by 
the exertions of Al-Mamun, which, without the Arabs, would have 
been wholly lost to us. A similar service has been rendered by Ar- 
menian translations, as Neumann of Munich was the first to show. Un- 
happily, a notice by the historian Guezi of Bagdad, which has been 
preserved by the celebrated geographer Leo Africanus, in a memoir 
entitled De Viris inter Arabes illustribus, leads to the conjecture that 
at Bagdad itself many Greek originals, which were believed to be use- 
less, were burned ; but this passage may not, perhaps, refer to import- 
ant manuscripts already translated. It is capable of several interpre 
tations, as has been shown by Bernhardy {Grundriss der Griech. Litte- 
ratur, th. i., s. 489), in opposition to Heeren's Gesckichte der Classiscken 
Litteratur, bd. i., s. 135. The Arabic translations of Aristotle have 
often been found serviceable in executing Latin versions of the original, 
as, for instance, the eight books of Physics, and the History of Animals; 
but the larger and better part of the Latin translations have been made 
direct from the Greek (Jourdain, Reck. Crit. sur VAge des Traductions 
d^Aristote, p. 230-236). An allusion to the same two-fold source may 
be recognized in the memorable letter of the Emperor Frederic \\. of 
Hohenstaufen, in which he recommends the translations of Aristotle 
which he presents, in 1232, to his universities, and especially to that of 
Bologna. This letter expresses noble sentiments, and shows that it 
was not only the love of natural history which taught Frederic H. to 
appreciate the philosophical value of the " Compilationes varias quae 
ab Aristotele aliisque philosophis sub Graecis Arabicisque vocabulis an- 
tiquitus edita) sunt." He writes as follows : •* We have from our earliest 



216 COSMOS. 

nevertheless, the zoological history of Avic^nna, in the posses- 
sion of the Royal Library at Paris, differs from Aristotle's 
work on the same subject.* As a botanist, we must name 
Ibn-Baithar of Malaga, whose travels in Greece, Persia, In- 
dia, and Egypt entitle him to be regarded with admiration 
for the tendency he evinced to compare together, by independ- 
ent observations, the productions of different zones in the East 
and West.t The point from whence all these efibrts ema- 
nated was the study of medicine, by which the Arabs long 
ruled the Christian schools, and for the more per.fect develop- 
ment of which Ibn-Sina (Avicenna), a native of Aschena, near 
Bokhara, Ibn-Roschd ( Averroes) of Cordova, the younger Sera- 
pion of Syria, and Mesue of Maridin on the Euphrates, avail- 
ed themselves of all the means yielded by the Arabian cara- 
van and sea trade. I have purposely enumerated the widely- 
removed birth-places of celebrated Arabian literati, since they 
are calculated to remind us of the great area over which the 
peculiar mental direction and the simultaneous activity of the 
Arabian race extended the sphere of ideas. 

The scientific knowledge of a more anciently-civilized race 
—the Indians — was also drawn within this circle, when, un- 

youth striven to attain to a more intimate acquaintance with science, 
although the cares of government have withdrawn us from it ; we have 
delighted in spending our time in the careful reading of excellent works, 
in order that our soul might be enlightened and strengthened by exer- 
cise, without which the life of man is wanting both in rule and in free- 
dom (ut auimae clarius vigeat instrumentum in acquisitione scientijE, 
sine qua mortalium vita non regitur liberaliter). Libros ipsos tamquam 
praemium amici Caesaris gratulantur accipite, et ipsos antiquis philoso- 
pbiorum operibus, qui vocis vestrae ministerio reviviscunt, aggregantes 
in auditorio vestro." (Compare Joui-dain, p. 169-178, and Friedrich 
von Raumer's excellent work Geschichte dei Hohenstaufen, bd. iii., 
1841, s. 413.) The Arabs have served as a uniting link between an- 
cient and modern science. If it had not been for them and their love 
of translation, a great portion of that which the Greeks had either 
formed themselves, or derived from other nations, would have been 
lost to succeeding ages. It is when considered from this point of view 
that the subjects which have been touched upon, though apparently 
merely linguistic, acquire general cosmical interest. 

* Jourdain, in his Traductions cf Aristote, p. 135-138, and Schneider, 
Adnot. ad Aristotelis de Animalibus Hist., lib. ix., cap. 15, speak of Mi- 
chael Scot's translation of Aristotle's Historia Animalium, and of a sim- 
ilar work by Avicenna (Manuscript No. 6493, in the Paris Library). 

t On Ibn-Baithai', see Sprengel, Gesch. der Arzneykunde, th. ii., 1823, 
s. 468; and Royle, On the Antiquity of Hindoo Medicine, p. 28. We 
have possessed, since 1840, a German translation of Ibn-Baithar, under 
the title Grosse Zusammenstellung uber die Krdfte der bekannten ein^ 
fachen Heil- nnd Nahrungs-mitteL, translated from the Arabic by J. v 
Soathe'.uier, 2 bandes. 



THE ARABS. 217 

der the Califate of Haroun Al-Raschid, several important 
works, probably those known under the half-fabulous name of 
Tscharaka and Susruta,* were translated from the Sanscrit 
into Arabic. Avicenna, who possessed a powerful grasp of 
mind, and who has often been compared to Albertus Magnus, 
affords, in his work on Materia Medica, a striking proof of the 
influence thus exercised by Indian literature. He is acquaint- 
ed, as the learned Royle observes, with the true Sanscrit name 
of the Deodwar of the snow-crowned Himalayan Alps, which 
had certainly not been visited by any Arab in the eleventh 
century, and he regards this tree as an alder, a species of ju- 
niper, from which oil of turpentine was extracted. t The sons 
of Averroes lived at the court of the great Hohenstaufen, Fred- 
eric II., who owed a portion of his knowledge of the natural 
history of Indian animals and plants to his intercourse with 
Arabian literati and Spanish Jews, versed in many languages.} 
The Calif Abdurrahman I. himself laid out a botanical gar- 
den at Cordova,^ and caused rare seeds to be collected by his 
own travelers in Syria and other countries of Asia. He plant- 
ed, near the palace of Rissafah, the first date-tree known in 
Spain, and sang its praises in a poem expressive of plaintive 
longing for his native Damascus. 

The most powerful influence exercised by the Arabs on 
general natural physics was that directed to the advances of 

* Royle, p. 35-65. Susruta, the sou of Visvamitra, is considered hj 
Wilson to have been a cotemporary of Rama. We have a Sanscrit edi- 
tion of his work ( The Sus'ruta, or System of Medicine taught, by Dhan- 
wantari, and composed by his disciple Stis'ruta, ed. by Sri Madhusfidana 
Gupta, vol. i., ii., Calcutta, 1835, 1836), and a Latin translation, Szis'ru- 
tas. dyurvedas. Id est Medicines Systema a venerabili Vhavantare demon- 
stratum, a Susruta discipulo compositum. Nunc pr. ex Sanskri^ in Lat- 
uium sermonem vertit Franc. Hessler, Erlangae, 1844, 1847, 2 vols. 

t Avicenna speaks of the Deiudur (Deodar), of the genus ^abhel (Ju- 
niperus) ; and also of an Indian pine, which gives a peculiar milk, syr 
deiudar (fluid turpentine). 

X Spanish Jews from Cordova transmitted the opinions of Avicenna 
to Montpellier, and principally contributed to the establishment of its 
celebrated medical school, which was framed according to Arabian 
models, and belongs to the twelfth century. (Cuvier, Hist, des Sciences 
Naturelles, t. i., p. 387.) 

$ Respecting the gardens of the palace of Rissafah, which was built 
by Abdurrahman Ibn-Moawijeh, see History of the Mohammedan Dy- 
nasties in Spain extracted from Ahmed Ibn-Mohammed Al-Makkari, by 
Pascual de Gayangos, vol. i., 1840, p. 209-211. " En su Huerta planto 
el Rey Abdurrahman una palma que eraentonces (756) unica, y de 
ella procedieron todas las que huy en Espana. La vista del arbol acren* 
taba mas que templaba su melancoHa." (Antonio Oonde, Hist, de la 
Domtnacion de los A abes en Espana, t. i., p. 169.) 
Vol. II.— K 



218 COSMOS. 

chemistry, a science for which this race created a new era 
It must be admitted that alchemistic and new Platonic fan- 
cies were as much blended with chemistry as astrology with 
astronomy. The requirements of pharmacy, and the equally 
urgent demands of the technical arts, led to discoveries which 
were promoted, sometimes designedly, and sometimes by a 
happy accident depending upon alchemistical investigation 
into the study of metallurgy. The labors of Geber, or rather 
Djaber (Abu-Mussah-Dschafar-al-Kufi), and the much more 
recent ones of Razes (Abu-Bekr Arrasi), have been attended 
by the most important results. This period is characterized 
by the preparation of sulphuric and nitric acids,^ aqua regia, 
preparations of mercury, and of the oxyds of other metals, and 
by the knowledge of the alcoholic process of fermentation. t 
The first scientific foundation, and the subsequent advances of 
chemistry, are so much the more important, as they imparted 
a knowledge of the heterogeneous character of matter, and 
the nature of forces not made manifest by motion, but which 
now led to the recognition of the importance of comjjosition, 
no less than to that of the perfectibility of form assumed in 
accordance with the doctrines of Pythagoras and Plato. Dif- 
ferences of form and of composition are, however, the elements 
of all our knowledge of matter — the abstractions which we 
believe capable, by means of measurement and analysis, of 
enabling us to comprehend the whole universe. 

It is difficult, at present, to decide what the Arabian chem- 
ists may have acquired through their acquaintance with In- 
dian literature (the writings on the Rasayana) ;$ from the 

* The preparation of nitric acid and aqua regia by Djaber (more 
properly Abu-Mussah-Dschafar) dates back more than five hundred 
years b^ore Albei'tus Magnus and Raymond Lully, and almost seven 
hundred years before the Erfurt monk, Basilius Valentinus. The dis- 
covery of these decomposing (dissolving) acids, which constitutes an 
epoch in the history of science, was, however, long ascribed to the three 
last-named experimentalists. 

t For the rules given by Razes for the vinous fermentation of amylum 
and sugar, and for the distillation of alcohol, see Hofer, Hist, de la 
Chimie, t. i., p. 325. Although Alexander of Aphrodisias {Joannis 
Philoponi Grammatici, in libr. de Oeneratione et Interitu Comm., Venet., 
1527, p. 97), properly speaking, only gives a circumstantial description 
of distillation from sea water, he also draws attention to the fact that 
wine may likewise be distilled. This statement is the more remark 
able, because Aristotle (MeteoroL, ii., 3, p. .^58, Bekker) had advanced 
the erroneous opinion that in natural evaporation fresh water only ros« 
from wine, as from the salt water of the sea. 

t The chemistry of the Indians, embracing alchemistic arts, is called 
raaayana {rasa, juice or fluid, also quicksilver ; and dyana, course or 



THE ARABS. 219 

ancient technical arts of the Egyptians ; the new alchemistic 
precepts of the pseudo-Democritus and the Sophist Synesius ; 
or even from Chinese sources, through the agency of the 
Moguls, According to the recent and very careful investiga- 
tions of a celebrated Oriental scholar, M. E-einaud, the inven- 
tion of gunpowder,* and its application to the discharge of 
hollow projectiles, must not he ascribed to the Arabs. Has- 
san Al-Rammah, who wrote between 1285 and 1295, was not 
acquainted with this application ; while, even in the twelfth 
century, and, therefore, nearly two hundred years before Ber- 
thold Schwarz, a species of gunpowder was used to blast the 
rock in the Rammelsberg, in the Harz Mountains. The in- 
vention of an air thermometer is also ascribed to Avicenna 
from a notice by Sanctorius, but this notice is very obscure, 
and six centuries passed before Galileo, Cornelius Drebbel, and 
the Academia del Cimento, by the establishment of an exact 
measurer of heat, created an important means for penetrating 
into a world of unknown phenomena, and comprehending the 
cosmical connection of effects in the atmosphere, the super- 
imposed strata of the ocean, and the interior of the earth, thus 
revealing phenomena whose regularity and periodicity excite 
our astonishment. Among the advances which science owes 
to the Arabs, it will be sufficient to mention Alhazen's work 
on Refraction, partly borrowed, perhaps, from Ptolemy's Op- 
tics, and the knowledge and first application of the pendulum 
as a means of measuring time, due to the great astronomer 
Ebn-Junis.f 

process), and forms, according to Wilson, the seventh division of the 
dyur- Veda, the " science of life, or of the prolongation of life." ( Royle, 
Hindoo Medicine, p. 39-48.) The Indians have been acquainted from 
the earliest times (Royle, p. 131) v\rith the application of mordants in 
calico or cotton printing, an Egyptian art, which is most clearly de- 
scribed in Pliny, lib. xxxv., cap. 11, No. 150. The word " chemistr}/^ 
indicates literally " Egyptian art," the art of the black land ; for Plu- 
tarch {De hide et Osir., cap. 33) knew that the Egyptians called their 
country Xjjfua, from the black earth. The inscription on the Rosetta 
stone has Ckmi. I find this word, as applied to the analytic art, first in 
the decrees of Diocletian against " the old writings of the Egyptians 
which treat of the *;^7/;U£a' of gold and silver" (rcepi ;t'77,u&lt;af apyvpov koI 
Xpvaov). Compare my Examen Crit. de V Hist, de la Geographic et de 
V Astronomic Nautiqiie, t. ii., p. 314, 

* Reinaud et Fav6, Du Feu Gr6geois,des Feux de Guerre et des Ori' 
gines de la Poudre a Canon, t. i., 1845, p. 89, 97, 201,and 211 ; Piobert 
Traits d'Artillerie, 1836, p. 25 ; Beckmann, Technologic, s. 342. 

t Laplace, Pricis de VHist. de VAstronomie, 1821, p. 60; and Am. 
S6dillot, Mimoire sur les Instrumens Astr. des Arabes, 1841, p. 44. 
Thomas Young (^Lectures on Natural Philosophy and the Mechanical 



220 COSMOS. 

Although the purity and rarely-disturbed transparency of 
tho sky of Arabia must have especially directed the attention 

Arts, 1807, vol. i., p. 191) does not either doubt that Ebn-Junis, at the 
ond of the tenth century, applied the pendulum to the measurement of 
time, but he ascribes the first combination of the pendulum with wheel 
work to Sanctorius, in 1612, therefore forty-four years before Huygens. 
With reference to the very elaborately constructed clock included in 
the presents which Haroun Al-Raschid, or, rather, the Calif Abdallah, 
sent, two hunlred years earlier, from Persia to Charlemagne at Aix-la- 
Chapelle, Egiuhard distinctly says that it was moved by water (Horo- 
fogium ex aurichalco arte mechanica mirifice compositum, in quo duo- 
decim horarum cursus ad clepsidram vertebatur) ; Einhardi Annates, 
in Pertz's Monumenta Germanice Historica, Scriptorum,t. i., 1826, p. 
195. Compare H. Mutius, De Germanorum Origine, Gestis, &amp;c. 
Chronic, lib. viii., p. 57, in Pistorii Germanicorum Scriptorum, I. ii., 
Francof., 1584 ; Bouquet, Recueil des Historiens des Gaules, t, v., p. 
333 and 354. The hours were indicated by the sound of the fall of 
gmall balls, and by the coming forth of small horsemen from as many 
opening doors. The manner in which the water acted in such clocks 
may indeed have been very different among the Chaldeans, who 
" weighed time" (determining it by the weight of fluids), and in the 
clepsydras of the Greeks and the Indians ; for the hydraulic clock-work 
of Ctesibius, under Ptolemy Euergetes IL, which marked the (civil) 
hours throughout the year at Alexandria, was never known, according 
to Ideler, under the common denomination of KXetpvSpa. (Ideler's 
Handbuch der Chronologic, 1825, bd. i., s. 231.) According to the de- 
scription of Vitruvius (lib. ix., cap. 4), it was an actual astronomical 
clock, a " horologium ex aqua," a very complicated " raachina hydrau- 
lica," working by toothed wheels (versatilis tympani denticuli sequales 
alius alium impellentes). It is therefore not improbable that the Arabs, 
who were acquainted with the improved mechanical constructions in 
use under the Roman empire, may have succeeded in constructing an 
hydraulic clock with wheel-work (tympana quae nonnulli rotas appel- 
lant, Graeci autam ireplToxa. Vitruvius, x., 4). Leibnitz {Annates Im.' 
perii Occidentis Brunsvicenses, ed. Pertz, t. i., 1843, p. 247) expresses 
his admiration of the construction of the clock of Haroun Al-Raschid 
{Abd-Allatif, trad, par Silvestre de Sacy, p. 578). The piece of mech- 
anism which the sultan sent from Egypt, in 1232, to the Emperor Fred 
eric II., seems, howevQr, to have been much more remarkable. It was 
a large tent, in which the sun and moon were moved by mechanism, 
and made to rise and set, and show the hours of the day and night at 
correct intervals of time. In the Annates Godefridi Monachi S. Panta- 
leonis apvd Coloniam Agrippinam, it is said to have been a " tentorium, 
in quo imagines solis et lunae artificialiter motae cursum suum certis et 
debitis spaciis peragrant, et boras diei et noctis infallibiliter indicant." 
{Freheri Rernm Germanicarum Scriptores, t. i., Argentor., 1717, p. 398.) 
The monk Godefridus, or whoever else may have written the annals 
of those years in the chronicle composed for the convent of St. Panta 
leon at Cologne, which was probably the work of many different authors 
(see Bdhmer, Pontes Rerum Germanicarum, bd. ii., 1845, s. xxxiv.- 
xxxvii.), lived in the time of the great Emperor Frederic II. himself. 
The emperor caused this curious work, the value of which was esti- 
mated at 20,000 marks, to be preserved at Venusium, with other treas- 
ures. (Fried, von Raumer, Gesch. der Hohenstaufen, bd. iii., * 430.) 



THE ARABS. 221 

of the people, in their early uncultivated condition, to the 
motions of the stars, as we learn from the fact that the stellar 
worship of Jupiter, practiced under the Lachraites by theTace 
of the Asedites, included Mercury, which, from its proximity 
to the sun, is less' frequently visible, it would nevertheless 
appear that the remarkable scientific activity manifested by 
the Arabs in all branches of practical astronomy is to be 
ascribed less to native than to Chaldean and Indian influ- 
ences. Atmospheric conditions merely favored that which 
had been called forth by mental qualifications, and by the 
contact of highly-gifted races with more civilized neighboring 
nations. How many rainless portions of tropical America, as 
Cumana, Coro, and Payta* enjoy a still more transparent at 
mosphere than Egypt, Arabia, and Bokhara ! A tropical sky, 
and the eternal clearness of the heavens, radiant in stars and 
nebulous spots, undoubtedly every where exercise an influence 
on the mind, but they can only lead to thought, and to the 
solution of mathematical propositions, where other internal 
and external incitements, independent of climatic relations, 
affect the national character, and where the requirements of 
religious and agricultural pursuits make the exact division of 
time a necessity prompted by social conditions. Among cal- 
culating commercial nations (as the Phoenicians) ; among 
constructive nations, partial to architecture and the measure- 
ment of land (as the Chaldseans and Egyptians), empirical 
rules of arithmetic and geometry were early discovered ; but 
these are merely capable of preparing the way for the estab- 
lishment of mathematical and astronomical science. It is 
only in the later phases of civilization that the established 
regularity of the changes in the heavens is known to be re- 
flected, as it were, in terrestrial phenomena, and that, in ac- 
cordance with the words of our great poet, we seek the " fixed 
pole." The conviction entertained in all climates of the regu- 
larity of the planetary movements has contributed more than 
any thing else to lead man to seek similar laws of order in the 
moving atmosphere, in the oscillations of the ocean, in the 

That a movement like that of the vault of heaven should have been 
given to the vsrhole tent, as has often been asserted, appears to me very 
improbable. In the Chronica Monasterii Hirsattgiensis, edited by 
Trithemius, we find scarcely any thing beyond a mere repetition of 
the passage in the Annales Godefridi, without any information regard- 
ing the mechanical construction. {Joh. Trithemii Opera Historical 
Part ii., Francof., 1601, p. 180.) Reiuaud says that the movement was 
imparted " par des ressorts caches." (Extraits des Historiens Arabe* 
ffelatifs aux Guerrea des Croisades, J 829. p. 435.) 



222 COSMOS. 

periodic course of the magnetic needle, and in the distribuiion 
of organisms over the earth's surface. 

The Arabs were in possession of planetary tables* as early 
as the close of the eighth century. We have already observed 
that the Susruta, the ancient incorporation of all the medical 
knowledge of the Indians, was translated by learned men be- 
longing to the court of the Calif Haroun Al-Raschid — a proof 
of the early introduction of Sanscrit literature. The Arabian 
mathematician Albiruni even went to India for the purpose 
of studying astronomy. His writings, which have only recent- 
ly been made accessible to us, prove how intimately he had 
made himself acquainted with the country, traditions, and 
comprehensive knowledge of the Indians.! 

However much the Arabian astronomers may have owed to 
the earlier civilized nations, and especially to the Indian and 
Alexandrian schools, they have, nevertheless, considerably ex- 
tended the domain of astronomy by their own practical en- 
dowments of mind ; by the number and direction of their ob- 
servations ; the improvement of their instruments for angular 
measurement ; and their zealous efforts to rectify the older ta- 
bles by a comparison with the heavens. In the seventh book 
of the Almagest of Abul-Wefa, Sedillot found a notice of the 
important inequality in the moon's longitude, which disappears 
at the syzygies and quadratures, attains its maximum at the 
octants, and has long been regarded, under the name oii varia- 
tion, as the discovery of Tycho Brahe.J The observations of 

* On the Indian tables which Alphazari and Alkoresmi translated 
into Arabic, see Chasles, Reckerches sur V Astronomie Indienne, in the 
Comples Rendus des Stances de VAcad. des Sciences, t. xxiii., 1846, p. 
846-850. The substitution of the sine for the arc, which is usually 
ascribed to Albategnius, in the beginning of the tenth century, also 
belongs originally to the Indians; tables of sines are to be found in the 
Surya-Sidd,hanta. 

t Reinaud, Fragments Arabes relatifs a VInde, p. xii.-xvii., 96-126, 
and especially 135-160. Albiruni's proper name was Abul-Ryhan. 
He was a native of Byrun, in the Valley of the Indus, and a friend of 
A*" cenna, with whom he lived at the Arabian academy which had 
been formed in Charezm. His stay in India, and the composition of 
his history of that country ( Tarikhi-Hind), of which Reinaud has made 
known the most remarkable fragments, belong to the years 1030-1032. 

X Sedillot, MaUriavx pour servir a V Histoire comparie des Sciences 
Mathematiques chez les Grecs et les Orientaux, t. i., p. 50-89 ; also in 
the Comptes Rendus de VAcad. des Sciences, t. ii., 1836, p. 202 ; t. xvii., 
1843, p. 163-173 ; t. xx., 1845, p. 1308. In opposition to this opinion, 
Biot maintains that the fine discovery of Tycho Brahe by no means 
belongs to Abul-Wefa, and -that the latter was acquainted, not with the 
" variation," but only with the second part of the " evection." {Joumal 



THE ARABS. 223 

Ebn-Junis in Cairo have become extremely important with 
reference to the perturbations and secular changes of the orbits 
of the two largest planets, Jupiter and Saturn.* The meas- 
urement of a degree, which the Calif Al-Mamun caused to be 
made in the great plain of Sindschar, between Tadmor and 
Hakka, by observers whose names have been transmitted to 
us by Ebn-Junis, has proved less important in its results than 
by the evidence which it affords of the scientific culture of the 
Arabian race. 

We must regard among the results yielded by the reflection 
of this culture, in the West, the astronomical congress held 
at Toledo, in Christian Spain, under Alfonso of Castile, in 
which the Rabbin Isaac 'Ebn Sid Hazan played an import- 
ant part ; and in the far East, the observatory founded by 
Ilschan Holagu, the grandson of the great conqueror Genghis 
Khan, on a hill near Meraghar, and supplied with many in- 
struments. It was here that Nassir Eddin, of Tus, in Kho- 
rassan, made his observations. These individual facts deserve 
to be noticed in a history of the contemplation of the universe, 
since they tend vividly to remind us of how much the Arabs 
have effected in diffusing knowledge over vast tracts of terri- 
tory, and in accumulatmg those numerical data which contrib- 
uted, in a great degree, during the important period of Kepler 
and Tycho, to lay the foundation of theoretical astronomy, 
and of correct views of the movements of the heavenly bodies. 
The spark kindled in those parts of Asia which were peopled 
by Tartars spread, in the fifteenth century, westward to Sa- 
marcand, where Ulugh Beig, of the race of Timour, establish- 
ed, besides an observatory, a gymnasium after the manner of 
the Alexandrian Museum, and caused a catalogue of stars to 
be drawn up, which was based on wholly new and independent 
observations.! 

Besides making laudatory mention of that which we owe 
to the natural science of the Arabs in both the terrestrial and 
celestial spheres, we must likewise allude to their contribu- 
tions in separate paths of intellectual development to the gen- 

des Savans, 1843, p. 513-532, 609-626, 719-737 ; 1845, p. 146-166 ; and 
Comptes Rendus, t. xx., 1845, p. 1319-1323.) 

* Laplace, Expos, du Systeme du Monde, note 5, p. 407. 

t On the observatory of Mei-agha, see Delambre, Histoire de VAttfO' 
nomie du Moyen Age, p. 198-203 ; and Am. Sedillot, Mim. sur les In- 
ttrumens Arabes, 1841, p. 201-205, where the gnomon is described with 
a circular opening. On the peculiarities of the star catalogue of Ulugh 
Beig, see J. J. Sedillot, TraitS des Instrumens Astronomiques des ArabeSt 
1834, p. 4 



224 COSMOS. 

eral mass of matheir.^itical science. According to the most 
recent works which have appeared in England, France, and 
Germany* on the history of mathematics, we learn that " the 
algebra of the Arabs originated from an Indian and a Greek 
source, which long flowed independently of one another." The 
Compendium of Algebra which the Arabian mathematician 
Mohammed Ben-Musa (the Chorowazneir), framed by com 
mand of the Calif Al-Mamun, was not based on Diophantus, 
but on Indian science, as has been shown by my lamented and 
too-early deceased friend, the learned Friedrich Rosen ;t and 
it would even appear that Indian astronomers had been called 
to the brilliant court of the Abbassides as early as the close 
of the eighth century, under Almansur. Diophantus was, ac 
cording to Castri and Colebrooke, first translated into Arabic 
by Abul-Wefa Buzjani, toward the close of the tenth century. 
The process of establishing a conclusion by a progressive ad 
vance from one proposition to another, which seems to have 
been unknown to the ancient Indian algebraists, was acquired 
by the Arabs from the Alexandrian school. This noble in- 
heritance, enriched by their additions, passed in the twelfth 
century, through Johannes Hispalensis and Gerhard of Cre- 
mona, into the European literature of the Middle Ages.$ " In 
the algebraic works of the Indians, we find the general solu- 
tion of indeterminate equations of the first degree, and a far 
more elaborate mode of treating those of the second, than has 
been transmitted to us in the writings of the Alexandrian phi- 
losophers ; there is, therefore, no doubt, that if the works of the 
Indians had reached us two hundred years earlier, and were 
not now first made known to Europeans, they might have 
acted very beneficially in favoring the development of modera 
analysis." 

The same channels and the same relations which led the 

* Colebrooke, Algebra teith Arithmetic and Mensuration, from the 
Sanscrit of Brabmagupta and Bbascara, Lond., 1817. Cbasles, Apergu 
Historique sur VOrigine et le D6veloppement des MHhodes en G6om6trie, 
1837, p. 416-502 ; Nesselmann, Versuch einer kritischen Geschichte der 
Algebra, tb. i., s. 30-61, 273-276, 302-306. 

t Algebra of Mohammed Ben-Musa, edited and translated by F. Rosen, 
1831, p. viii., 72, and 196-199. Tbe matbematical knowledge of India 
was extended to Cliina about tbe year 720 ; but tbis was at a period 
wben many Arabians were already settled in Canton and otber Cbi 
ne?e cities. Reinaud, Relation des Voyages faits par les Arabes dan* 
rinde et a la Chine, t. i., p. cix. ; t. ii., p. 36. 

t Cbasles, Histoire de VAlgebre, in the Comptes Rendus. t. xiii., 184? 
p. 497-524, 601-626. Compare, also, L:bri, in the same volume, f 
559-563. 



THE ARABS. 225 

Arabs to a knowledge of Indian algebra, enabled them also to 
obtain, in the ninth century, Indian numerals from Per&amp;ia and 
the shores of the Euphrates. Persians were established at 
that period as revenue collectors on the Indus, and the use of 
Indian numerals was gradually transmitted to the revenue 
officers of the Arabs in Northern Africa, opposite the shores 
of Sicily. Nevertheless, the important historical investiga- 
tions of the distinguished mathematicia*n Chasles* have ren- 
dered it more than probable, according to his correct interpre- 
tation of the so-called Pythagorean table in the Geometry of 
Boethius, that the Christians in the West were familiar with 
Indian numerals even earlier than the Arabs, and that they 
were acquainted with the use of nine figures or characters, 
according to their position value, under the name of the system 
of the abacus. 

The present is not a fitting place to enter more fully into 
the consideration of this subject, which I have already treated 
of in two papers (written in 1819 and 1829), and presented to 
the Academie cles Inscriptio7is at Paris, and the Academy of 
Sciences at Berlin ;t but, in our attempts to solve a historical 

* Chasles, Apcrqu Histonque des Methodes en GeomUrie, 1837, p. 
464-472 ; also in the Comptes Rendus de V Acad, des Sciences, t. viii., 
1839. p. 78; t. ix., 1839, p. 449 ; t. xvi., 1843, p. 15G-173, and 218-246; 
t. xvii., 1843, p. 143-154. 

t Humboldt, Ueber die bet versckiedenen Volkern ublichen Systeme von 
Zahlezeichen nnd uber den Ursprung des Stellenwerthes in den Indischen 
Zahlen, in CrelVs Journal fur die reine und angewandte Mathematik, bd. 
iv. (1829), s. 205-231. Compare, also, my Examen Crit. de VHist. de 
la G6ographie, t. iv., p. 275. The simple enumeration of the different 
methods which nations, to whom the Indian arithmetic by position was 
unknown, employed for expressing the multiplier of the fundamental 
groups, furnishes, in my opinion, an explanation of the gradual rise or 
origin of the Indian system. If we express the number 3568, either 
perpendicularly or horizontally, by means of " indicators," correspond- 
ing to the different divisions of the abacus (thus, M'^C^X^P), we shall 
easily perceive that the group-signs (MCXI) might be omitted. But 
our Indian numbers are, however, nothing more than these indicators 
— the multipliers of the different groups. We are also reminded of this 
designation by indicators by the ancient Asiatic Suanpan (the reckon- 
ing machine which the Moguls introduced into Russia), which has suc- 
cessive rows of strings, to represent thousands, hundreds, tens, and 
units. These strings would bear in the numerical example just cited, 
3, 5, 6, and 8 balls. In the Suanpan there is no apparent group-sign ; 
the group-signs are the positions themselves ; and these positions (strings) 
are occupied by units (3, 5, 6, and 8) as multipliers or indicators. In 
both ways, whether by the figurative (the written) or by the palpable 
arithmetic, we arrive at the value of position and at the simple use of 
nine numbers. If a string be without any ball, the place will be left 
blank in wiiting If a group (a member of the progression) bo wan^ 



22B COSMOS. 

problem, concerning which much yet remains to be elucida- 
ted, the question arises, whether position-value— the ingenious 

ing, the vacuum is graphically filled by the symbol of a vacuum {siinya, 
sifron, tzuphra). In the " Method of Euiocius," I find in the group of 
the myriads the first trace of the exponential or indicatioual system of 
the Greeks, which vi^as so influential in the East : M", M^, M^, desig. 
nate 10,000, 20,000, 30,000. That which is here alone applied to the 
myriads, passes among the Chinese and the Japanese, who derived 
their knowledge from the Chinese two hundred years before the Chris- 
tian era, through all the multiples of the groups. In the Gobar, the 
Arabian "dust- writing" (discovered by my deceased friend and teacher 
Silvestre de Sacy, in a manuscript in the Ubrary of the old Abbey of 
St. Germain des Prcs), the group-signs are points — therefore zeros or 
ciphers ; for in India, Thibet, and Persia, zeros and points are identical. 
In the Gobar, 3 • is written for 30 ; 4 • • for 400 ; and 6 •*• for GOOO. The 
Indian numbers, and the knowledge of the value of position, must be 
more modern than the separation of the Indians and the Arians ; for the 
Zend nation only used the far less convenient Pehlwi numbers. The 
conjecture of the successive improvements that have been made in the 
Indian notation appears to me to be supported by the Tamul system, 
which expresses units by nine characters, and all other values by group- 
signs for 10, 100, and 1000, with multipliers added to the left. The 
singular uptOfioi 'IvdiKol, in a scholium of the monk Neophytos, discov- 
ered by Prof. Brandis in the library of Paris, and kindly communicated 
to me for publication, appear to corroborate the opinion of such a grad- 
ual process of improvement. The nine characters of Neophytos are, 
with the exception of the 4, quite similar to the present Persian; but 
the value of these nine units is raised to 10, 100, 1000 fold by writing 
one, two, or three ciphers or zero-signs above them ; as 2 for 20, 2 4 
for 24, 5 for 500, and 3 6 for 306. If we suppose points to be used 
instead of zeros, we have the Arabic dust-writing, Gobar. As my 
brother, Wilhelm von Humboldt, has often remarked of the Sanscrit, 
that it is very inappropriately designated by the terms " Indian" and 
*' ancient Indian" language, since there are in the Indian peninsula 
several very ancient languages not at all derived from the Sanscrit, so 
the expression Indian or ancient Indian arithmetical characters is also 
very vague, and this vagueness applies both to the form of the charac- 
ters and to the spirit of the methods, which sometimes consist in mere 
juxtaposition, sometimes in the employment of coefficients and indica- 
tors, and sometimes in the actual value of position. Even the existence 
of the cipher or zero is, as the scholium of Necphytos shows, not a 
necessary condition of the simple position-value in Indian numerical 
characters. The Indians who speak the Tamul language have arith- 
metical symbols which differ from their alphabetical characters, and of 
which the 2 and the 8 have a faint resemblance to the 2 and the 5 of 
the Devanagari figures (Rob. Anderson, Rudiments of Tamul Grammar, 
1821, p. 135) ; and yet an accurate comparison proves that the Tamul 
arithmetical characters are derived from the Tamul alphabetical writing. 
According to Carej'-, the Cingalese are still more different from the 
Devanagari characters. In the Cingalese and in the Tamul, there ia 
no position-value or zero-sign, but symbols for the groups of tens, hund- 
reds, and thousands. The Cingalese work, like the Romans, by juxta 
position, the Tamuls by coefficients. Ptolemy uses the present zero- 



THE AKABS. 227 

application of position — which occurs in the Tuscan abacus, 
and in the Suarapan of Inner Asia, has been twice independ 
ently invented, in the East under the Ptolemies, and in the 
West ? or whether the system of position-value may not have 
been transferred by the direction of universal traffic from the 
Indian western peninsula to Alexandria, and subsequently 
have been given out amid the renewed dreams of the Pytha- 
goreans as an invention of the founder of their sect ? The 
bare possibility of ancient and wholly unknown combinations 
anterior to the sixtieth Olympiad is scarcely worthy of notice. 
Wherefore should a feeling of similar requirements not have 
severally given rise, among highly-gifted nations of different 
origin, to combinations of the same ideas ? 

While the algebra of the Arabs, by means of that which 
they had acquired from the Greeks and Indians, combined 
with the portions due to their own invention, acted so bene- 
ficially on the brilliant epoch of the Italian mathematicians 
of the Middle Ages, notwithstanding a great deficiency in 
symbolical designations, we likewise owe to the same people 
the merit of having furthered the use of the Indian numerical 
system from Bagdad to Cordova by their writings and their 
extended commercial relations. Both these effects — the si- 
multaneous difiusion of the knowledge of the science of num- 
bers and of numerical symbols with value by position — have 
variously, but powerfully, favored the advance of the mathe- 
matical portion of natural science, and facilitated access to the 
more abstruse departments of astronomy, optics, physical geog- 
raphy, and the theories of heat and magnetism, which, with- 
out such aids, would have remained unopened. 

The question has often been asked, in the history of nations, 
v/hat would have been the course of events if Carthage had 
conquered Rome and subdued the West ? " We may ask 
with equal justice," as Wilhelm von Humboldt* observes, 
** what would be the condition of our civilization at the pres- 
ent day if the Arabs had remained, as thoy long did, the sole 
possessors of scientific knowledge, and had spread themselves 
permanently over the West ? A less favorable result would 

sign to represent the descending negative scale for degrees and minutes 
both in his Almagest and in his Geography. The zero-sign was conse- 
quently in use in the West much earlier than the epoch of the invasion 
of the Arabs. (See my work above cited, and the memoir printed in 
Crell's Mathematical Journal, p. 215, 219, 223, and 227.) 

* Wilhelm von Humboldt, Ueber die Kaioi-Sprache, bd. i., s. cclxii. 
Compare, also, the excellent description of the Arabs in Herder's Jdeen 
%ur Oesch. der Mensckeit, book xix., 4 and 5. 



228 COSMOS. 

probably have supervened in both cases. It is to the sama 
causes which procured for the Romans a dominion over the 
world — the Roman spirit and character — and not to external 
and merely adventitious chances, that we owe the influence 
exercised by the Romans on our civil institutions, our laws, 
languages, and culture. It was owing to this beneficial in- 
fluence, and to the intimate alliance of races, that we were 
rendered susceptible to the influence of the Greek mind and 
language, while the Arabs directed their consideration princi- 
pally only to those scientific results of Greek investigation 
which referred to the description of nature, and to physical, 
astronomical, and purely mathematical science." The Arabs, 
by carefully preserving the purity of their native tongue, and 
the delicacy of their figurative modes of expression, were en- 
abled to impart the charm of poetic coloring to the expression 
of feeling and of the noble axioms of wisdom ; but, to judge 
from what they were under the Abbassides, had they built on 
the same foundation with which we find them familiar, it is 
scarcely probable that they could have produced those works 
of exalted poetic and creative art, which, fused together in one 
harmonious accord, are the glorious fruits of the mature seaBon 
of our European culture. 



PERIOD OF OCEANIC DISCOVERIES.-OPENING OF THE WESTERN HEM- 
ISPHERE.— EXTENSION OF SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE, AND THOSE 
EVENTS WHICH LED TO OCEANIC DISCOVERIES.— COLUMBUS, SE- 
BASTIAN CABOT, AND GAMA— AMERICA AND THE PACIFIC— CABRIL- 
LO, SEBASTIAN VIZCAINO, MENDANA, AND QUIROS.— THE RICHEST 
ABUNDANCE OF MATERIALS FOR THE FOUNDATION OF PHYSICAL GE 
OGRAPHY IS PRESENTED TO THE NATIONS OF WESTERN EUROPE. 

The fifteenth century belongs to those remarkable epochs 
in which all the efforts of the mind indicate one determined 
and general character, and one unchanging striving toward 
the same goal. The unity of this tendency, and the results 
by which it was crowned, combined with the activity of whole 
races, give to the age of Columbus, Sebastian Cabot, and 
Gama, a character both of grandeur and enduring splendor. 
In the midst of two different stages of human culture, the 
fifteenth century may be regarded as a period of transition, 
which belongs both to the Middle Ages and to the beginning 
of more recent times. It is the age of the greatest discover- 
ies in. space, embracing almost ah degrees of latitude and all 
elevations of the earth's surface While this period doubled 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 229 

the number of the works of creation known to the inhabitants 
of Europe, it hkewise offered to the intellect new and powerful 
incitements toward the improvement of natural sciences, in 
the departments of physics and mathematics.* 

The world of objects now, as in Alexander's campaigns, 
although with still more overwhelming power, manifested 
itself to the combining mind in individual forms of nature, and 
in the concurrent action of vital forces. The scattered images 
of sensuous perception were gradually fused together into one 
concrete whole, notwithstanding their abundance and divers- 
ity, and terrestrial nature was conceived in its general char-, 
acter, and made an object of direct observation, and not of 
vague presentiments, floating in varying forms before the im- 
agination. The vault of heaven revealed to the eye, which 
was as yet unaided by telescopic powers, new regions, unknown 
constellations, and separate revolving nebulous masses. At 
no other period, as we have already remarked, were a greater 
abundance of facts, and a richer mass of materials for the es- 
tablishment of comparative physical geography, presented to 
any one portion of the human race. At no other period have 
discoveries in the material world of space called forth more 
extraordinary changes in the manners and well-being of men, 
and in the long-enduring condition of slavery of a portion of 
the human race, and their late awakening to political freedom ; 
nor has any other age afibrded so large an extension to the 
field of view by the multiplication of products and objects of 
barter, and by the establishment of colonies of a magnitude 
hitherto unknown. 

On investigating the course of the history of the universe, 
we shall discover that the germ of those events which have 
imparted any strongly-marked progressive movement to the 
human mind may be traced deeply rooted in the track of pre- 
ceding ages. It does not lie in the destinies of mankind that 
all should equally experience mental obscuration. A princi- 
ple of preservation fosters the eternal vital process of advanc- 
ing reason. The age of Columbus attained the object of its 
destination so rapidly because a track of fruitful germs had 
already been cast abroad by a number of highly-gifted fnen, 
who formed, as it were, a lengthened beam of light amid the 
darkness of the Middle Ages. One single century — the thir- 
teenth — shows us Roger Bacon, Nicolaus Scotus, Albertua 
Magnus, and Vincentius of Beauvais. The mental activity, 

• Compare Humboldt, Examen Crit. de VHist. de la G^ograjrhie, t 
i., p. viii. and xix. 



230 COSMOS. 

once awakened, was soon followed by an extension of geo- 
graphical knowledge. When Diego Ribero returned, in the 
year 1525, from the geographical and astronomical congress 
which had been held at the Puente de Caya, near Yelves, for 
the purpose of settling the contentions that had arisen regard- 
ing the boundaries of the two empires of the Portuguese and 
the Spaniards, the outlines of the new continent had been 
already laid down from Terra del Fuego to the coasts of Lab- 
rador. On the western side of America, opposite to Asia, the 
advance was, of course, less rapid, although Rodriguez Cabrillo 
had penetrated further northward than Monterey as early as 
1543 ; and notwithstanding that this great and daring mar- 
iner met his death in the Canal of Santa Barbara, in New 
California, the pilot, Bartholomeus Ferreto, conducted the ex- 
pedition to the 43d degree of latitude, where Vancouver's 
Cape Oxford is situated. The emulous enterprise of the 
Spaniards, English, and Portuguese, directed to one and the 
same object, was then so great, that fifty years sufficed to de- 
termine the external configuration or the general direction of 
the coasts of the countries in the Western hemisphere. 

Although the acquaintance of the nations of Europe with 
the western part of the earth is the main subject of our con- 
sideration in this section, and that around which the numer- 
ous relations of a more correct and a grander view of the 
universe are grouped, we must yet draw a strong line of sepa- 
ration between the undoubted first discovery of America, in 
\ts northern portions, by the Northmen, and its subsequent 
tediscovery in its tropical regions. While the Califate still 
flourished under the Abbassides at Bagdad, and Persia was 
under the dominion of the Samanides, whose age was so fa- 
vorable to poetry, America was discovered in the year 1000 
by Leif, the son of Eric the Red, by the northern route, and 
as far as 41° 30' north latitude.* The first, although acci- 
dental, incitement toward this event emanated from Norway. 
Toward the close of the ninth century, Naddod was driven by 

* Parts of America were seen, although no landing was made ou 
them, fourteen years before Leif Ericksson, in the voyage which Bjarne 
Herjulfsson undertook from Greenland to the southward in 98B. Leif 
first saw the land at the island of Nantucket, 1*^ south of Boston ; then 
in Nova Scotia ; and, lastly, in Newfoundland, which was subsequent- 
ly called " Litla Helluland," but never " Vinland." The gulf, which 
divides Newfoundland from the mouth of the great river St. Lawrence, 
was called by the Northmen, who had settled in Iceland and Green- 
land, Markland's Gulf. See Caroli ChrisUani Rafn Antiquitates Amer- 
icana:, 1845, p. 4, 421, 423, and 463. 



OCEANIC i^ISCOVERIES, 231 

Storms to Iceland while attempting to reach the Faroe Islands, 
which had already been visited by the Irish. The first settle- 
ment of the Northmen was made in 875 by Ingolf. Green- 
land, the eastern peninsula of a land which appears to be 
every where separated by the sea from America proper, was 
early seen,* although it was first peopled from Iceland a hund- 
red years later (983). The colonization of Iceland, which 
Naddod first called Snow-land, SnjolaTid, was carried through 
Greenland in a southwestern direction to the New Continent. 

The Faroe Islands and Iceland must be considered as in- 
termediate stations and starting points for attempts made to 
reach Scandinavian America. In a similar manner, the set- 
tlement at Carthage served the Tyrians in their efforts to 
reach the Straits of Gadeira and the port of Tartessus ; and 
thus, too, Tartessus, in its turn, led this enterprising people 
from station to station on to Cerne, the Gauleon (Ship Island) 
of the Carthaginians. t 

Notwithstanding the , proximity of the opposite shores of 
Labrador i^Helluland it mikla), one hundred and twenty-fivo 
years elapsed from the first settlement of the Northmen in 
Iceland to Leif 's great discovery of America. So small were 
the means possessed by a noble, enterprising, but not wealthy 
race for furthering navigation in these remote and dreary re- 
gions of the earth. The littoral tracts of Vinland, so called 
by the German Tyrker from the wild grapes which were 
found there, delighted its discoverers by the fruitfulness of the 
soil and the mildness of its climate when compared with Ice- 
land and Greenland. This tract, which was named by Leif 
the " Good Vinland" ( Vinland it goda), comprised the coast 
line between Boston and New York, and consequently parts 
of the present states of Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Con- 
necticut, between the parallels of latitude of Civita Vecchia 
and Terracina, which, however, correspond there only to mean 
annual temperatures of 47°*8 and 52°- 1.$ This was the prin 

* Gunnbjdrn was wrecked, in 876 or 877, on the rocks subsequently 
called by his name, which were lately rediscovered by Captain Graah. 
Gunnbjdrn saw the east coast of Greenland, but did not land upon it. 
(Rafn, Antiquit. Amer., p. 11, 93, and 304.) 

t See ante, p. 132. 

X These mean annual temperatures of the eastern coast of America, 
under the parallels of 42° 25' and 41° 15', correspond in Europe to tha 
latitudes of Berlin and Paris, places which are situated 8° or 10° more 
to the north. Besides, the decrease of mean annual tempeiature from 
lower to higher latitudes is here so rapid, that, in the interval of latitude 
between Boston and Philadelphia, which is 2° 41', an increase of one 



232 COSMOS. 

cipal settlement of the Northmen. The colonists had ol int\ 
to contend with a very warlike race of Esquimaux, who thcfi 
extended further to the south under the name of the Skralin- 
ger. The first Bishop of Greenland, Eric Upsi, an Icelander, 
undertook, in 1121, a Christian mission to Vinland ; and the 
name of the colonized country has even been discovered in old 
national songs of the inhabitants of the Faroe Islands.* 

The activity and bold spirit of enterprise manifested by the 
Greenland and Icelandic adventurers are proved by the cir- 
cumstance that after they had established settlements south 
of 41° 30' north latitude, they erected three boundary pillars 
on the eastern shores of Baffin's Bay, at the latitude of 72° 
55', on one of the Woman's Islands,! northwest of the present 
most northern Danish colony of Upernavick. The Runic in- 
scriptions, which were discovered in the autumn of the year 
1824, contain, according to Rask and Finn Magnusen, the 
date 1135. From this eastern coast of Baffin's Bay, more 
than six hundred years before the bold expeditions of Parry 
and Ross, the colonists very regularly visited Lancaster Sound 
and a part of Barrow's Straits for the purpose of fishing. The 
locality of the fishing ground is very definitely described, and 
Greenland priests, from the Bishopric of Gardar, conducted 
the first voyage of discovery (1266). This northwestern sum- 
mer station was called the Kroksfjardar Heath. Mention is 
even made of the drift-wood (undoubtedly from Siberia) col- 
lected there, and of the abundance of whales, seals, walruses, 
and sea bears. $ 

degi-ee of latitude corresponds to a decrease in the mean annual tem- 
perature of almost 3°.6, while, according to my researches, on the sys- 
tem of isothermal lines in Europe, the same decrease of temperature 
scarcely amounts to half a degree for the same interval. {Asie Centrale 
t. iii., p. 227.) 

* See Carmen Fesroicum in quo Vinlandice mentio fit. (Rafn, Anti 
quit. Amer., p. 320-332.) 

t The Runic stone was placed on the highest point of the island of 
Kingiktorsoak " on the Saturday before the day of victory," i. e., before 
the 21st of April, a great heathen festival of the ancient Scandinavians, 
which, at their conversion to Christianity, was changed into a Christian 
fe^ival. (Rafn, Antiquit. Amer., p. 347-355.) On the doubts which 
Brynjulfsen, Mohnike, and Klaproth express respecting the Runic num 
bers, see my Ex amen Crit., t. ii., p. 97-101 ; yet, from other indications, 
Brynjulfsen and Graah are led to regard the important monument on 
the Woman's Islands (as well as the Runic inscriptions found at Igalik- 
ko and Egegeit, lat. 60° 5 1' and 60° 0', and the ruins of buildings near 
Upernavik, lat. 72° 50') as belonging undoubtedly to the eleventh and 
twelfth centuries. 

t Rafn, Antiquit. Amer., p. 20, 274, and 415-418 ^WUhelmi, Ueber hi 



OCEANIC DISCOVERI1.S. 233 

Certain accounts of the intercourse maintained between the 
extreme north of Europe, or between Greenland and Iceland 
with the American Continent, properly so called, do not ex- 
tend beyond the fourteenth century. In the year 1347, a 
ship was sent from Greenland to Markland (Nova Scotia) to 
collect building timber and other necessary articles. On the 
return voyage the ship encountered heavy storms, and was 
obliged to take refuge at Straumfjord in the west of Iceland 
These are the latest accounts preserved to us by ancient Scan- 
dinavian authorities of the visits of Northmen to America.^ 

We have hitherto kept strictly on historical grouna. By 
means of the critical and highly praiseworthy efforts of Chris- 
tian Rafii, and of the Royal Society of Northern Antiquities 
at Copenhagen, the sagas and narratives of the voyages of the 
Northmen to Helluland (Newfoundland), to Markland (the 
mouth of the St. Lawrence and Nova Scotia), and to Vinland 
(Massachusetts), have been separately printed, accompanied 

and, Hvitramannaland, Greenland, und Vinland, s. 117-121). Accord 
ing to a very ancient saga, the most northern part of the east coast of 
Greenland was also visited in 1194, under the name of Svalbard, at a 
part which corresponds to Scoresby's Land, near the point 73° 16', 
where my friend Col., then Capt. Sabine, made his pendulum observ- 
ations, and where there is a very dreary cape bearing my name. (Rafn, 
Antiquit. Amer., p. 303, and Aper^u de V Ancienne Giographie dcs R6 
gions Arctiques de V Amerique, 1847, p. 6.) 

* Wilhelmi, op. cit., s. 226; Rafn, Antiquit. Amer., p. 264 and 453 
The settlements on the west coast of Greenland, which, until the mid- 
dle of the fourteenth century, were in a very flourishing condition, fell 
gradually to decay, from the ruinous operation of commercial monopo- 
lies, from the attacks of Esquimaux (Ski'alinger), the " black death," 
which, according to Hecker, depopulated the north during the years 
1347 to 1351, and from the invasion of a hostile fleet, regarding whose 
course nothing is known. At the present day no faith is any longer at- 
tached to the meteorological myth of a sudden alteration of climate, 
and of the formation of a barrier of ice, which was immediately follow- 
ed by the entire separation from their mother country of the colonies 
established in Greenland. As these colonies were only on the more 
temperate district of the west coast of Greenland, it can not be possible 
that a bishop of Skalholt, in 1540, should have seen "shepherds feed- 
ing their flocks" on the east coast of Greenland, beyond the icy wall. 
The accumulation of masses of ice on the east coast opposite to Iceland 
depends on the configuration of the land, the neighborhood of a chain 
of mountains having glaciers and running parallel to the coast line, and 
on the direction of the oceanic current. This state of things can not be 
solely referred to the close of the fourteenth or the beginning of the fif 
teenth century. As Sir John BaiTow has veiy justly shown, it has been 
eubject to many accidental alterations, particularly in the years 1815- 
1817. (See Barrow, Voyages of Discovery within the Arctic Regions^ 
1846, p. 2-6.) Pope Nicholas V. appointed a bishop for G- eenland aa 
late as 1448. 



234 c?osMos. 

by able commentaries.* The length of the voyage, the direo 
tion of its course, and the times of the rising and setting of the 
Bun, are all minutely detailed. 

Less certainty appertains to the traces which have been 
supposed to be found of a discovery of America before the year 
1000 by the Irish. The Skralinger related to the Northmen 
settled in Vinland, that further southward, beyond the Ches- 
apeake Bay, there dwelt " white men, who clothed themselves 
in long white garments, carried before them poles to which 
cloths were attached, and called with a loud voice." This 
account was interpreted by the Christian Northmen to indi- 
cate processions, in which banners were borne accompanied 
by singing. In the oldest sagas, the historical narrations of 
Thorfinn Karlsefne, and the Icelandic Landnama book, these 
southern coasts, lying between Virginia and Florida, are des- 
ignated under the name of the Land of the White Men. 
They are expressly called Great Ireland {Irland it mikld), 
and it is maintained that they were peopled by the Irish. 
According to testimonies which extend to 1064, before Leif 
discovered Vinland, and probably about the year 982, Ari 
Marsson, of the powerful Icelandic race of Ulf the squint- 
eyed, was driven in a voyage from Iceland to the south by 
storms on the coasts of the Land of the White Men, and there 
baptized in the Christian faith ; and, not being allowed to de- 
part, was recognized by men from the Orkney Islands and Ice- 
land.f 

An opinion has been advanced by some northern antiqua- 
rians that, as in the oldest Icelandic documents the first in- 
habitants of the island are called " West Men, who had come 
across the sea" (emigrants settled in Papyli on the southeast 
coast, and on the neighboring small island of Papar), Iceland 
was not at first peopled directly from Europe, but from Vir- 
ginia and Carolina (Great Ireland, the American White Men's 
Land), by Irishmen who had earlier emigrated to America. 

* The main sources of information are the historic narrations of Eric 
the Red, Thorfinn Karlsefne, and Snorre Thorbrandsson, probably writ- 
ten in Greenland itself as early as the twelfth century, and partly by 
descendants of settlers born in Vinland (Rain, Antiquit. Amer., p. vii., 
xiv., and xvi.). The care with which genealogical tables were kept was 
so great, that that of Thorfinn Karlsefne, whose son, Snorre Thor- 
brandsson, was born in America, has been brought down from 1007 to 
1811. 

t Hvitramannaland, the Land of the White Men. Compare the 
original sources of information, in Rafn, Antiqvit. Amer., p. 203-206, 
211, 446-451 and Wilhelmi, Ueber Island, Hvitramannaland, &amp;c., a 
75-81. 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 235 

The important work, JDe Mensura Orhis Terrce, composed 
by the Irish monk Dicuil about the year 825, and, therefore, 
thirty-eight years before the Northmen acquired their knowl- 
edge of Iceland from Naddod, does not, however, confirm this 
opinion. 

Christian anchorites in the north of Europe, and pious 
Buddhist monks in the interior of Asia, explored and opened 
to civilization regions that had previously been inaccessible. 
The eager striving to diffuse religious opinions has sometimes 
paved the way for warlike expeditions, and sometimes for the 
introduction of peaceful ideas and the establishment of rela- 
tions of commerce. Religious zeal, which so strongly charac- 
terizes the doctrines promulgated in the systems of India, 
Palestine, and Arabia, and which is so widely opposed to the 
mdifference of the ancient polytheistic Greeks and Romans, 
was the means of furthering the advance of geographical 
knowledge in the earlier portions of the Middle Ages. Le- 
tronne, the commentator on Dicuil, has shown much ingenu- 
ity in his attempts to prove that after the Irish missionaries 
had been driven from the Faroe Islands by the Northmen, 
they began, about the year 795, to visit Iceland. The North- 
men, when they first reached Iceland, found Irish books, mass 
bells, and other objects, which had been left by the earlier 
settlers, called Papar. These Pap&lt;x, fathers, are the Clerici 
of Dicuil.* If, as his testimony would lead us to conclude, 
these objects had belonged to Irish monks, who had come 
from the Faroe Islands, the question naturally arises, why 
these monks [Papar) should be termed in the native sagas 
Westmen (Vestmenn), who had " come from the West across 
the sea? {Kommir til vestan um haf)'' The deepest ob- 
scurity still shrouds every thing connected with the voyage 
of the Gaelic chief Madoc, son of Owen Guineth, to a great 
western land in the year 1170, and the connection of this 
event with the Great Ireland of the Icelandic Saga. In like 
manner, the race of Celto-Americans, whom credulous trav- 
elers have professed 1 5 discover in many parts of the United 
States, have also disappeared since the establishment of an earn- 
est' and scientific ethnology, based, not on accidental similari- 
ties of sounds, but on giammatical forms and organic structure."! 

* Letronne, Recherches Giogr. et Crit. sur le Livre " de Menstira Or 
bis Terras" compose en Irlaiide, par Dicuil, 1814, p. 129-146. Con* 
pare ray JExamen Crit. de VHist. de la G6ogr., t. ii., p. 87-91. 

t The statements which have been advanced from the time of Raleigh, 
of natives of Virginia speaking pure Celtic of the supposition of thf 



COSMOS. 

That this first discovery of America in oi before the rlev« 
enth century should not have produced the important and 

Gaelic salutation, hao, hui, iach, having been heard there; of Owen 
Chapelain, in 1669, saving himself from the hands of the Tuscaroras, 
who were about to scalp him, " because he addressed them in his na- 
tive Gaelic," have all been appended to the ninth book of my travels 
{Relation Historique, t. iii., 1825, p. 159). These Tuscaroras of North 
Carolina are now, however, distinctly recognized by linguistic iuvesti 
gations as an Iroquois tribe. See Albert Gallatin on Indian Tribes, in 
the Archceologia Americana, vol. ii. (1836), p. 23 and 57. An extensive 
catalogue of Tuscarora words is given by Catlin, one of the most admi- 
rable observers of manners who ever lived among the aborigines of 
America. He, however, is inclined to regard the rather fair, and often 
blue-eyed nation of the Tuscaroras as a mjxed people, descended from 
the ancient Welsh, and from the original inhabitants of the American 
continent. See his Letters and Notes on the Manners, Customs, and Con' 
ditions of the North American Indians, 1841, vol. i., p. 207 ; vol. ii., p. 
259 and 262-265. Another catalogue of Tuscarora words is to be found 
in my brother's manuscript notes respecting languages, in the Royal 
Library at Berlin. " As the structure of Ameiican idioms appears re- 
markably strange to nations speaking the modern languages of Western 
Europe, and who readily suffer themselves to be led away by some 
accidental analogies of sound, theologians have generally believed that 
they could trace an affinity with Hebrew, Spanish colonists with the 
Basque, and the English or French settlers with Gaelic, Erse, or the 
Bas Breton. I one day met on the coast of Peru a Spanish naval officer 
and an English whaling captain, the former of whom declared that he 
had heard Basque spoken at Tahiti, and the other Gaelic, or Erse, at 
the Sandwich Islands." — Humboldt, Voyage aux Regions Equinoctiales, 
Relat. Hist., t. iii., 1825, p. 160. 

Although no connection of language has yet been proved, I by no 
means wish to deny that the Basques and the people of Celtic origin 
inhabiting Ireland and Wales, who were early engaged in fisheries on 
the most remote coasts, may have been the constant rivals of the Scan- 
dinavians in the northern parts of the Atlantic, and even that the Irish 
preceded the Scandinavians in the Faro6 Islands and in Iceland. It is 
much to be desired that, in our days, when a sound and severe spirit 
of criticism, devoid of a character of contempt, prevails, the old inves- 
tigations of Powel and Richard Hakluyt ( Voyages and Navigations., vol. 
iii., p. 4) might be resumed in England and in Ireland. Is the state- 
ment based on fact, that the wanderings of Madoc were celebrated in 
the poems of the Welsh bard Meredith, fifteen years before Columbus's 
discovery? I do not participate in the rejecting spirit which has, but 
tco often, thrown popular traditions into obscurity, but I am, on the 
contrary, firmly persuaded that, by greater diligence anrl perseverance, 
many of the historical problems which relate to the maritime expedi- 
tions of the early part of the Middle Ages ; to the striking identity in 
religious traditions, manner of dividing time, and works of art in Amer- 
ica and Eastern Asia; to the migrations of the Mexican nations; to the 
ancient centers of dawning civilization in Aztlan, Quivira, and Upper 
Louisiana, as well as in the elevated plateaux of Cundinamarca and 
Peru, will one day be cleared up by discoveries of facts with which 
we have hitherto been entirely unacquainted. See my Examen Grit 
de VHisf, de la Oiogr. du Nouveau Continent, t, ii., p. 142-149 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 231 

pern/anent results yielded to the physical contemplation of 
the universe by the rediscovery of the same continent by Co- 
lumbus at the close of the fifteenth century, was the necessary 
consequence of the uncivilized condition of the people, and the 
nature of the countries to which the early discoveries were 
limited. The Scandinavians were wholly unprepared, by pre- 
vious scientific knowledge, for exploring the countries in which 
they settled, beyond what was absolutely necessary for the sat- 
isfaction of their immediate wants. Greenland and Iceland, 
which must be regarded as the actual mother countries of the 
new colonies, were regions in which man had to contend with 
all the hardships of an inhospitable climate. The wonderful- 
ly organized free state of Iceland, nevertheless, maintained its 
independence for three centuries and a half, until civil free- 
dom was annihilated, and the country became subject to Hako 
VI., king of Norway. The flower of Icelandic literature, its 
historical records, and the collection of the Sagas and Eddas, 
appertain to the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. 

It is a remarkable phenomenon in the history of the culti- 
vation of nations, that when the safety of the national treas- 
ures of the most ancient records of Northern Europe was en- 
dangered at home by domestic disturbances, they should have 
been transported to Iceland, and have been there carefully 
preserved, and thus rescued for posterity. This rescue, the 
remote consequence of Ingolf 's first colonization in Iceland, in 
the year 875, has proved, amid the vague and misty forms of 
Scandinavian myths and symbolical cosmogonies, an event of 
great importance in its influence on the poetic fancy of man- 
kind. It was natural knowledge alone that acquired no en- 
largement. Icelandic travelers certainly occasionally visited 
\he universities of Germany and Italy, but the discoveries of 
the Greenlanders in the south, and the inconsiderable inter- 
course maintained with Vinland, whose vegetation presented 
no remarkable physiognomical character, withdrew colonists 
and mariners so little from their European interests, that no 
knowledge of these newly-colonized countries seems to have 
been diffiised among the cultivated nations of Southern Eu- 
rope. It would even appear that no tidings of these regions 
reached the great Genoese navigator in Iceland. Iceland and 
Greenland had then been separated upward of two hundred 
years, since 1261, when the latter country had lost its repub- 
lican form of- government, and when, on its becoming a fief 
of the crown of Norway, all intercourse with foreigners and 
even with Iceland was interdf* i&gt;*ed to it. Christopher Colum- 



238 COSMOS. 

bus, in a work " On the five habitable zones of the earth," 
•which has now become extremely rare, says that in the month 
of February, 1477, he visited Iceland, "where the sea was 
not at that time covered with ice, and which had been resort- 
ed to by many traders from Bristol."* If he had there heard 
tidings of the earlier colonization of an extended and contin- 
uous tract of land, situated on the opposite coast, Helluland 
it mikla, Markland, and the good Yinland, and if he connect- 
ed this knowledge of a neighboring continent with those proj- 
ects which had already engaged his attention since 1470 and 
1473, his voyage to Thule (Iceland) would have been made 
so much the more a subject of consideration during the cele- 
brated lawsuit regarding the merit of an earlier discovery, 
which did not end till 1517, since the suspicious fiscal officer 
mentions a map of the world {Tnappa rtiwruLo) which had been 
seen at Rome by Martin Alonzo Pinzon, and on which the 
New Continent was supposed to be marked. If Columbus 
had desired to seek a continent of which he had obtained in- 
formation in Iceland, he would assuredly not have directed 
his course southwest from the Canary Islands. Commercial 
relations were maintained between Bergen and Greenland un- 
til 1484, and, therefore, until seven years after Columbus's 
voyage to Iceland. 

Wholly different from the first discovery of the New Con- 
tinent in the eleventh century, its rediscovery by Christopher 
Columbus and his explorations of the tropical regions of Amer- 
ica have been attended by events of cosmical importance, and 
by a marked influence on the extension of physical views. 
Although the mariners who conducted this great expedition 
at the end of the fifteenth century were not actuated by th&lt;» 

♦ While this circumstance of the absence of ice in February, 1477, 
has been brought forward as a proof that Columbus's Island of Thule 
could not be Iceland, Finn Magnusen found in ancient historical sources 
that until March, 1477, there was no snow in the northern part of Ice- 
land, and that in February of the same year the southern coast was 
free from ice. Examen Crit., t. i., p. 105 ; t. v., p. 213. It is very re 
-narkable, that Columbus, in the same *' Tratado de las cinco xonas hab- 
itables," mentions a more southern island, Frislanda ; a name which 
is not in the maps of Andrea Bianco (1436), or in that of Fra Mauro 
(1457-1470), but which plays a great part in the travels, mostly re- 
garded as fabulous, of the brothers Zeni (1388-1404). (Compare Exa- 
men Crit., t. ii., p, 114-126.) Columbus can not have been acquainted 
with the travels of the Fratelli Zeni, as they even remained unknown 
to the Venetian family until the year 1558, in which Marcolini first 
published them, fifty-two years after the death of the great admiral. 
When came the admiral's acquaintance with the name Frislanda 7 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 239 

design of attempting to discover a new quarter of the world, 
and although it would appear to be proved that Columbus 
and Amerigo Vespucci died in the firm conviction that they 
had merely touched on portions of Eastern Asia,=* yet the ex- 
pedition manifested the perfect character of being the fulfill- 
ment of a plan sketched in accordance with scientific com- 
binations. The expedition was safely conducted westward, 
through the gate opened by the Tyrians and Colseus of Samos, 
across the immeasurable dark sea, niare tenebrosum, of the 
Arabian geographers. They strove to reach a goal, with the 
limits of which they believed themselves acquainted. They 
were not driven accidentally thither by storms, as Naddod and 
Gardar had been borne to Iceland, and Gunlijorn, the son of 
Ulf Kraka, to Greenland. Nor were the discoverers guided 
on their course by intermediate stations. The great cosmog- 
rapher, Martin Behaim, of Niirnberg, who accompanied the 
Portuguese Diego Cam on his expedition to the western coastji 
of Africa, lived four years, from 1486 to 1490, in the Azores ■ 

* See the proofs, which I have collected from trustworthy docu 
ments, for Columbus, in the Examen Crit., t. iv., p. 233, 250, and 261, 
and for Vespucci, t. v., p. 182-185. Columbus was so fully convinced 
that Cuba was part of the continent of Asia, and even the south pari 
of Khatai (the province of Mango), that on the 12th of June, 1494, ht 
caused all the crews of his squadron (about 80 sailors) to swear thaf 
they were convinced he might go from Cuba to Spain by land, " que' 
esta tierra de Cuba fuese la tierra firme al comienzo de las Indias y fin 
k quien en estas partes- quisiere venir de Espana por tierra ;" and 
that " if any who now swore it should at any future day maintain the 
contrary, they would have to expiate their perjury by receiving one 
hundred stripes, and having the tongue torn out." (See Informacion 
del Escribano pxiblico, Fernando Perez de Luna, in Navarrete, Viages y 
Descubrimientos de los Espanoles, t. ii., p. 143, 149.) When Columbus 
was approaching the island of Cuba on his first expedition, he believed 
himself to be opposite the Chinese commercial cities of Zaitun and 
Quinsay (y es cierto, dice el Almirante questa e$ la tierra firme y que 
estoy, dice el, ante Zayto y Guinsay). " He intends to present the let- 
ters of the Catholic monarchs to the great Mogul Khan (Gran Can) in 
Khatai, and to return immediately to Spain (but by sea) as soon as he 
shall have thus discharged the mission intrusted to him. He subse- 
quently sends on shore a baptized Jew, Luis de Torres, because he un 
derstands Hebrew, Chaldee, and some Arabic," which are languages 
in use in Asiatic trading cities. (See Columbus's Journal of his Voy- 
ages, 1492, in Navarrete, Viages y Descubrim., t. i., p. 37, 44, and 46.) 
Even in 1533, the astronomer Schoner maintained that the whole oi 
the so-called New World was a part of Asia (superioris Indise), and 
that the city of Mexico (Temistitan), conquered by Cortes, was no 
other than the Chinese commercial city of Quinsay, so excessively ex- 
tolled by Marco Polo. (See Joannis Schoneri Carlostadii Opusculum 
Oeographicum, Norimb., 1533, pars ii., cap. 1-20.) 



*M0 COSMOS. 

but it was not from these islands, which he between the coasts 
of Spain and Maryland, and only at |ths the distance from 
the latter, that America was discovered. The preconception 
of this event is celebrated with rich poetical fancy in those 
stanzas of Tasso, in which he sings of the deeds which Her- 
cules ventured not to attempt. 

Non oso di tentar-l'alto oceano: 

Segno le mete, en troppo breve chiostri, 

L'ardir ristrinse dell'ingegno umano, 

Tempo verrd che fian d'Ecole i segni 

Favola vile ai naviganti industri 

Un uom delta Liguria avra ardimento 

All' incognito corso esporsi in prima. 

Tasso, XV. St., 25, 30, et 31. 

And yet it was of this ''uom della Liguria'' that the great 
Portuguese historical writer, Johannes Barros,* whose first de- 
cade appeared in 1552, simply remarked that he was a vain 
and fanciful babbler {Jiomem fallador e glorioso em mostrar 
suas habilidades, e muis fantastico, e de i7nagi?iafdes c&amp;m sua 
llha Cypango). Thus, through all ages and through all 
stages of civiUzation, national hatred has striven to obscure 
the glory of honorable names. 

The discovery of the tropical regions of America by Chris- 
topher Columbus, Alonso de Hojeda, and Alvarez Cabral, can 
not be regarded in the history of the contemplation of the uni- 
verse as one isolated event. Its influence on the extension of 
physical science, and on the increase of materials yielded to 
the ideal world generally, can not be correctly understood 
without entering into a brief consideration of the period which 
separates the epoch of the great maritime expeditions from 
that of the maturity of scientific culture among the Arabs. 
That which imparted to the age of Columbus its peculiar 
character of uninterrupted and successful efforts toward the 
attainment of new discoveries and extended geographical 
knowledge, was prepared slowly and in various ways. The 
means which contributed most strongly to favor these efforts 
were a small number of enterprising men, who early excited 
a simultaneous and general freedom of thought, and an inde- 
pendence of investigation into the separate phenomena of na- 
ture ; the influence exercised on the deepest sources of mental 
vigor by the renewed acquaintance formed in Italy with the 
works of ancient Greek literature ; the discovery of an art 
which lent to thought at once wings of speed and powers of 

* Da Asia de Joao de Barros e de Diego de Couto, dec. i., liv. iii 
cap. 11 (Parte i Lisboa, 1778, p. 250). 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES, 241 

perpetuity ; and the more extended knowledge of Eastern 
Asia acquired by traveling merchants, and by monks vv^lio 
had been sent on embassies to the Mogul rulers, and which 
was diffused by them among those nations of the southwest 
of Europe who maintained extensive commercial relations 
with other countries, and who were therefore most anxious 
to discover a nearer route to the Spice Islands. To these 
means, which most powerfully facilitated the accomplishment 
of the wishes so generally entertained at the close of the fif- 
teenth century, we must add the advance in the art of navi- 
gation, the gradual perfection of nautical instruments, both 
magnetic and astronomical, and, finally, the application of 
certain methods for the determination of the ship's place, and 
the more general use of the solar and lunar ephemerides of 
Regie montanus. 

Without entering into the details of the history of science 
which would be foreign to the present work, I would enumer 
ate, among those who prepared the way for the epoch of 
Columbus and Gama, three great names — Albertus Magnus 
Roger Bacon, and Vincenzius of Beauvais. I have named 
them according to time, but the most celebrated, influential, 
and intellectual was Roger Bacon, a Franciscan monk of 
Ilchester, who devoted himself to the study of science at Ox- 
ford and Paris. All three were in advance of their age, and 
acted influentially upon it. In the long and generally un- 
fruitful contests of the dialectic speculations and logical dog- 
matism of a philosophy which has been designated by the in- 
definite and equivocal name of scholastic, we can not fail to 
recognize the beneficial influence exercised by what may bo 
termed the reflex action of the Arabs. The peculiarity of 
their national character, already described in a former section, 
and their predilection for communion with nature, procured 
for the newly-translated works of Aristotle an extended diffu- 
'iion which was most instrumental in furthering the establish- 
ment of the experimental sciences. Until the close of the 
twelfth and the beginning of the thirteenth century, miscon- 
ceived dogmas of the Platonic philosophy prevailed in the 
schools. Even the fathers of the Church believed that they 
could trace in them the prototypes of their own religious 
7iews.* Many of the symbolizing physical fancies of Timse- 

* Jourdain, Recherch. Crii.snrles Traductions d^ Arisiote, p.230-'234, 
and 421-423; Letronne, Des Opinions Cosmo graphiques dcs Peres dt 
VEglise, rapprochies des Doctrines philoaophiques de la Grece, in tho 
Revue des deux Mondes, 1834, 't. i., p. 632. 

VbL. II— L 



242 COSMOS. 

MS were eagerly taken up, and erroneous cosmical views, wh(6e 
groundlessness had long been shown by the mathematical 
Bchool of Alexandria, were revived under the sanction of Chris- 
tian authority. Thus the dominion of Platonism, or, more 
correctly speaking, the new adaptations of Platonic views, 
were propagated far into the Middle Ages, under varying 
forms, from Augustine to Alcuin, Johannes Scotus, and Bern- 
hard of Chartres.* 

When the Aristotelian philosophy gained the ascendency 
by its controlling influence over the direction of the human 
mind, its effect was manifested in the two-fold channel of in- 
vestigation into speculative philosophy and a philosophical 
elaboration of empirical natural science. Although the former 
of these directions may appear foreign to the object I have 
had in view in the present work, it must not be passed with 
out notice, since, in the midst of the age of dialectic scholas- 
tics, it incited some few noble and highly-gifted men to the 
exercise of free and independent thought in the most various 
departments of science. An extended physical contemplation 
of the universe not only requires a rich abundance of observa- 
tion as the substratum for a generalization of ideas, but also a 
preparatory and invigorating training of the human mind, by 
which it may be enabled, unappalled amid the eternal con- 
test between knowledge and faith, to meet the threatening 
impediments which, even in modern times, present them- 
selves at the entrance of certain departments of the experi- 
mental sciences, and would seem to render them inaccessible. 
There are two points in the history of the development of man 
which must not be separated — ^the consciousness of man's just 
claims to intellectual freedom, and his long unsatisfied de- 
sire of prosecuting discoveries in remote regions of the earth. 
These free and independent thinkers form a series, which be- 
gins in the Middle Ages with Duns Scotus, Wilhelm of Oc- 
cam, and Nicolas of Cusa, and leads from Ramus, Campa- 
nella, and Giordano Bruno to Descartes. t 

The seemingly impassable gulf between thought and act- 

• Friedrich von Raumer, Ueber die Philosophie des dreizeK'iten Jahr- 
hnnderts, in his Hist. Tasckenbuch, 1840, s. 468. On the tendency to- 
ward Platonism in the Middle Ages, and on the contests c^f the schcxils, 
see Heinrich Ritter, Geach. der Chrisil. Philosophic, th. ii., s .159 ; th. iii., 
«. 131-160, and 381-417. 

t Cousin, Cours de i'Hist. de la Philosophie, t. i., 1829, p. 360 and 389- 
436 ; Fragmens de Philosophie CarUsienne, p. 8-12 and 403. Compare, 
also, the recent ingenious work of Christian Bartholoraes, entitled Jor^ 
dano Bruno, 1847, 1. 1., p. 308; t. ii., p, 409-410. 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 243 

ual being — the relations between the mind that recognizes 
and the object that is recognized — separated the dialectics 
into the two celebrated schools of Realists and Nominalists. 
The almost forgotten contests of these schools of the Middle 
Ages deserve a notice here, because they exercised a special 
influence on the final establishment of the experimental sci- 
ences. The Nominalists, who ascribed to general ideas of 
objects only a subjective existence in the human mind, finally 
remained the dominant party in the fourteenth and fifteenth 
centuries, after having undergone various fluctuations of suc- 
cess. From their greater aversion to mere empty abstrac- 
tions, they urged before all the necessity of experiment, and 
of the increase of the materials for establishing a sensuous 
basis of knowledge. This direction was at least influential in 
favoring the cultivation of empirical science ; but even among 
those with whom the Realistic views were maintained, an ac- 
quaintance with the literature of the Arabs had successfully 
opposed a taste for natural investigation against the all-ab- 
sorbing sway of theology. Thus we see that in the different 
periods of the Middle Ages, to which we have perhaps been 
accustomed to ascribe too strong a character of unity, the 
great work of discoveries in remote parts of the earth, and 
their happy adaptation to th« extension of the cosmical sphere 
of ideas, were gradually being prepared on wholly different 
paths and in purely ideal and empirical directions. 

Natural science was intimately associated with medicine 
and philosophy among the learned Arabs, and in the Chris- 
tian Middle Ages with theological polemics. The latter, from 
their tendency to assert an exclusive influence, repressed em- 
pirical inquiry in the departments of physics, organic morphol- 
ogy, and astronomy, which was for the most part closely allied 
to astrology. The study of the comprehensive works of Aris- 
totle, which had been introduced by Arabs and Jewish rabbis, 
had tended to lead to a philosophical fusion of all branches 
of study ;* and hence Ibn-Sina (Avicenna) and Ibn-Roschd 
(Averroes), Albertus Magnus, and Roger Bacon, passed for 
the representatives of all the knowledge of their time. The 
faOiB which in the Middle Ages surrounded the names of these 
great men&gt; was proportionate to the general diffiision of this 
opinion of their endowments. 

Albertus Magnus, of the family of the Counts of Bollstadt, 
must also be mentioned as an independent observer in the do- 

* Jourdain, Sur les Trad. d'Aristote, p. 236 ; and Michael Sachs, Du 
reliffiose Poesie der Juden in Spanien^ 1845, 8. 180-200. 



244 COSMOS. 

maiu of analytic chemistry. It is true that his hopes were 
directed to the transmutation of the metals, but in his at- 
tempts to fulfill this object he not only improved the practical 
manipulation of ores, but he also enlarged the insight of men 
into the general mode of action of the chemical forces of na- 
ture. His works contain some extremely acute observations 
on the organic structure and physiology of plants. He was 
acquainted with the sleep of plants, the periodical opening 
and closing of flowers, the diminution of the sap during evap- 
oration from the surfaces of leaves, and with the influence 
of the distribution of the vascular bundles on the indentations 
of the leaves. He wrote commentaries on all the physical 
works of the Stagirite, although in that on the history of ani- 
mals he followed the Latin translation of Michael Scotus from 
the Arabic* The work of Albertus Magnus, entitled Liber 
Cosmographicus de Natura Locorum, is a kind of physical 
geography. I have found in it observations, which greatly 
excited my surprise, regarding the simultaneous dependence 
of climate on latitude and elevation, and the effect of differ- 
ent angles of incidence of the sun's rays in heating the earth's 
surface. Albertus probably owes the praise conferred on him 
by Dante less to himself than to his beloved pupil St. Thomas 
Aquinas, who accompanied him from Cologne to Paris in 1245, 
and returned with him to Germany in 1248. 

Questi, che tn'e a destra piu vicino, 
Frate e maestro fummi ; ed esso Albeito 
E' di Cologna, ed io Thomas d'Aquino. 

n Paradiso, x., 97-99. 

In all that has directly operated on the extension of the 
natural sciences, and on their establishment on a mathemat- 

* The greater share of merit in regard to the history of animals be- 
longs to the Emperor Frederic II. We are indebted to him for import- 
ant independent observations on the internal structure of bird«. (See 
Schneider, in Reliqua Libromm Frederici II., imperaioris de arte venan- 
di cum avibns, t. i., 1788, in the Preface.) Cuvier also calls this prince 
of the Hohenstaufen line the " first independent and original zoologist 
of the scholastic Middle Ages." On the correct view of Albert Mag- 
nus, on the distribution of heat over the earth's surface under different 
latitudes and at different seasons, see his Liber Cosmo graphicvs de Na- 
tura Locorum, Argent., 1515, fol. 14 b. and 23 a. (Examen Crit., t. i., 
p. 54-58) In his own observations, we, however, unhappily too often 
Snd that Albertus Magnus shared in the uncritical spirit of his age. He 
thinks he knows " that rye changes on a good soil into wheat ; that 
from a beech wood which has been hewn down, a birch wood will 
spring up from the decayed matter ; and that from oak branches stuck 
into the earth vines arise " (Compare, also, Ernst Meyer, Utber die Bo 
tanik des IZten -Jahrhunderts, in the LinncEa, b&lt;l. x., 1836, s. 719.) 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 245 

ical basis, and by the calling forth of phenonf.cna by the pro- 
cess of experiment, Roger Bacon, the cotemporary of Alber- 
tus of Bollstadt, may be regarded as the most important and 
influential man of the Middle Ages. These two men occupy 
almost the whole of the thirteenth century ; but to Roger Ba- 
con belongs the merit that the influence which he exercised 
on the form of the mode of treating the study of nature has 
been more beneficial and lasting than the various discoveries 
which, with more or less justice, have been ascribed to him. 
Stimulating the mind to independence of thought, he severe- 
ly condemned the blind faith attached to the authority of the 
schools, yet, far from neglecting the investigations of the an- 
cient Greeks, he directed his attention simultaneously to phil- 
ological researches,* and the application of mathematics and 
of the Scientia experimentalis, to which last he devoted a 
special section of the Opus Majus^ Protected and favored 
by one pope (Clement IV.), and accused of magic and impris- 
oned by two others (Nicholas III. and IV.), he experienced 
the changes of fortune common to great minds in all ages. 
He was acquainted with the Optics of Ptolemy,^ and with 

* So many passages of the Opus Majus show the respect whicl Roger 
Bacon entertained for Grecian antiquity, that, as Jourdain has already 
remarked (p. 429), we can only interpret the wish expressed by him in 
a letter to Pope Clement IV., '* to burn the works of Aristotle, in order 
to stop the diffusion of error amon^ the scholars," as referring to the 
bad Latin translations from the Arabic. 

t " Scientia experimentalis a vnlgo stadentium penitus ignorata; duo 
tamen sunt modi cognoscendi, scihcet per argumeiitum et experientiam 
(the ideal path, and the path of experiment). Sine experientia nihil 
sufBcienter sciri potest. Argumentum concludit, sed non certificat, 
neque removet duditationem ; et quiescat animus in intuita veritatis, 
nisi eam inveniat via experientiie." {Opus Majus, pars vi., cap. 1.) I 
have collected all the passages relating to Roger Bacon's physical 
knowledge, and to his proposals for various inventions, in the Examen 
Crit. de V Hist, de la Geogr., t. ii., p. 293-299. Compare, also, Whe- 
well, Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, vol. ii., p. 323-337. 

X See ante, p. 194. I tind Ptolemy's Optics cited in the Opus Ma- 
jus (ed. Jebb, Lond., 1733), p. 79, 288, and 404. It has been justly 
denied (Wilde, Geschichte der Optik, th. i., s. 92-96) that the knowledge 
derived from Alhazen, of the magnifying power of segments of spheres, 
was actually the means of leading Bacon to construct spectacles. This 
invention would appear to have been known as early as 1299, or to 
belong to the Florentine Salvino degli Aimati, who was btuied in 1317 
VA the Church of Santa Maria Maggiore at Florence. If Roger Bacon, 
who completed his Opus Majus in 1267, speaks of instruments by means 
of which small letters appear large, " utiles senibus habentibus oculos 
debiles," his words prove, as do also the practically erroneous consid 
erations which he subjoins, that he can not himself have executed that 
which obscurely floated before his mind as possible. 



246 coSxMos. 

the Almagest. As he, like the Arabs, always calls Hippar* 
chus Abraxis, we may conclude that he also made use of only 
a Latin translation from the Arabic. Next to Bacon's chem- 
ical experiments on combustible explosive mixtures, his theo- 
retical optical works on perspective, and the position of the 
focus in concave mirrors, are the most important. His pro- 
found Opus Majus contains proposals and schemes of practi- 
cable execution, but no clear traces of successful optical discov- 
eries. Profoundness of mathematical knowledge can not be 
ascribed to him. That which characterizes him is rather a 
certain liveliness of fancy, which, owing to the impression ex- 
cited by so many unexplained great natural phenomena, and 
the long and anxious search for the solution of mysterious 
problems, was often excited to a degree of morbid excess in 
those monks of the Middle Ages who devoted themselves to 
the study of natural philosophy. 

Before the invention of printing, the expense of copyists 
rendered it difficult, in the Middle Ages, to collect any large 
number of separate manuscripts, and thus tended to produce 
a great predilection for encyclopedic works after the exten- 
sion of ideas in the thirteenth century. These merit special 
consid.^ration, because they led to a generalization of ideas. 
There appeared the twenty books DeRerum Natura of Thom- 
as Cantipratensis, Professor at Louvain (1230); The Mir- 
ror of Nature [Speculum Naturale), written by Vincenzius of 
Beauvais (Bellovacensis) for St. Louis and his consort Mar- 
garet of Provence (1250) ; The Book of Nature, by Conrad 
von Meygenberg, a priest at Ratisbon (1349) ; and the Pic- 
ture of the World {Imago Mundi) of Cardinal Petrus de Al- 
liaco, bishop of Cambray (1410), each work being" in a great 
measure based upon the preceding ones. These encyclopedic 
compilations were the forerunners of the great work of Father 
Reisch, the Margarita Philosophica, the first edition of which 
appeared in 1486, and which for half a century operated in a 
remarkable manner on the diffusion of knowledge. I must 
here pause for a moment to consider the *' Picture of the 
World" of Cardinal AUiacus (Pierre d'Ailly). I have else- 
where shown that the work entitled " Imago Mundi" exer- 
cised a greater influence on the discovery of America than 
did the correspondence with the learned Florentine Toscanel- 
li.* All that Columbus knew of Greek and Roman writers, 

* See my Examm CriL, t. i., p. 61, 64-70, 96-108; t. ii., p. 349 
** There are five memoirs JDe Concordantia Astronomia cum Theologian 
by Pierre d'Aillj whom Don Fernando Colon always calls Pedro da 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 247 

all those passiiges of Aristotle, Strabo, and Seneca, on the prox- 
nnity of Eastern Asia to the Pillars of Hercules, which, as his 
Bon Fernando says, were the means of inciting him to discover 
the Indian lands {autoridad de los escritores "para mover al 
Ahniranie d descubrir las Indias), were gathered by the ad- 
miral from the writings of the cardinal. He must have car- 
ried these works with him on his voyages ; for, in a letter 
which he addressed to the Spanish monarchs from the island 
of Haiti, in the month of October, 1498, he translated word 
for word a passage from AUiacus's treatise, De Quantitate 
TerrcB habitabilis, which apjiears to have made a deep im- 
pression on his mind. Columbus probably did not know that 
Alliacus had also transcribed verbatim^ from an earlier work, 
the Opus. Majus of Roger Bacon.* Singular age, when the 
combined testimony of Aristotle and Averroes (Avenryz), of 
Esdras and of Seneca, regarding the small extent of the ocean 
in comparison with continental masses, could serve to convince 
monarchs of the expediency of a costly enterprise ! 

I have already drawn attention to the marked predilection 
manifested at the close of the thirteenth century for the study 
of natural forces, and the progressive and philosophical direc- 
tion assumed by this study in its scientific establishment on 
the basis of experiment. It still remains briefly to consider 
the influence exercised by the revival of classical literature, at 
the close of the fourteenth century, on the deepest sources of 
the mental life of nations, and, therefore, on the general con- 
templation of the universe. The individuality of certain 
highly-gifted men had contributed to increase the rich mass of 
facts possessed by the world of ideas. The susceptibility of a 
freer intellectual development already existed when Greek 
literature, driven from its ancient seats, acquired a firm footing 
in Western lands, under the favoring action of apparently ac- 
cidental relations. 

The Arabs, in their classical studies, had remained strangers 
to all that appertains to the inspiration of language, their 
studies being limited to a very small number of the writers 
of antiquity, and, in accordance with their strong national pred- 
ilection for natural investigation, principally to the physical 
books of Aristotle, to the Almagest of Ptolemy, the botanical 

Helico. These essays remind us of some very recent ones on the Mo 
«aic Geology, published four hundred years after the carduial's." 

* Compare Columbus's letter, Na^varrete, Viages y Descubrimientos 
t. i., p. 244, with the Imago Mundi of Cardinal d'Ailly, cap. 8, and 
Eoger Bacon's Opus Majus, p. 183. 



548 COSMOS. 

and chemical treatises of Dioscorides, t^iid the cosmological 
fancies of Plato. The dialectics of Aristotle were blended by 
the Arabs with the study of Physics, as in earlier times, in the 
Christian mediaeval age, they were with that of theology. 
Men borrowed from the ancients what they judged susceptible 
of special application, but they were far removed from appre- 
hending the spirit of Hellenism in its general character, from 
penetrating to the depths of the organic structure of the lan- 
guage, from deriving enjoyment from the poetic creations of 
the Greek imagination, or of seeking to trace the marvelous 
luxuriance displayed in the fields of oratory and historical 
composition. 

Almost two hundred years before Petrarch and Boccacio, 
John of Salisbury and the Platonic Abelard had already exer- 
cised a favorable influence with reference to an acquaintance 
with certain works of classical antiquity. Both possessed the 
power of appreciating the charm of writings in which freedom 
and order, nature and mind, were constantly associated togeth- 
er ; but the influence of the aesthetic feeling awakened by them 
vanished without leaving a trace, and the actual merit of 
having prepared in Italy a permanent resting-place for the 
muses exiled from Greece, and of having contributed most 
powerfully to re-establish classical literature, belongs of right 
to two poets, linked together by the closest ties of friendship, 
Petrarch and Boccacio. A monk of Calabria, Barlaam, who 
had long resided in Greece under the patronage of the Em- 
peror Andronicus, was the instructor of both.* They were 
the first to begin to make a careful collection of Roman and 
Greek manuscripts ; and a taste for a comparison of languages 
had even been awakened in Petrarch, t whose philological acu- 
men seemed to strive toward the attainment of a more general 
contemplation of the universe. Emanuel Chrysoloras, who 
was sent as Greek embassador to Italy and England (1391), 
Cardinal Bessarion of Trebisonde, Gemistus Pletho, and the 
Athenian Demetrius Chalcondylas, to whom we owe the firs*, 
printed edition of Homer, were all valuable promoters of the 
study of the Greek writers,^ AH these came from Greece 
before the eventful taking of Constantinople (29th May, 1453) ; 
Constantine Lascaris alone, whose forefathers had once sat on 
the Byzantine throne, came later to Italy. He brought with 

* Heeren, G'esch. der Classischen LiUeratnr, bd. i., s. 284-290. 
t Klaproth, Mimoires relatives a f Asie, t. iii., p. 113. 
X The Florentine etlitiou of Homer of 1488; but the first priutad 
Greek book was the grammar of Constantine Lascaris, iu 1476. 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 249 

him a precious collection ol Greek manuscripts, now buried in 
the rarely-used libraiy of the Escurial * The first Greek book 
was printed only fourteen years before the discovery of Ameri- 
ca, although the invention of printing was probably made 
simultaneously and wholly independently by Guttenberg in 
Strasburg and Mayence, and by Lorenz Yansson Koster at 
Haarlem, between 1436 and 1439, and, therefore, in the for- 
tunate period of the first immigration of the learned Greeks 
into Italy. t 

Two centuries before the sources of Greek literature were 
opened to the nations of the West, and twenty-five years be- 
fore the birth of Dante — one of the greatest epochs in the 
history of the civilization of Southern Europe — events occur- 
red in the interior of Asia, as well as in the east of Africa, 
which, by extending commercial intercourse, accelerated the 
period of the circumnavigation of Africa and the expedition 
of Columbus. The advance of the Moguls in twenty-six years 
from Pekin and the Chinese Wall to Cracow and Liegnitz, 
terrified Christendom. A number of able monks were sent 
forth as missionaries and embassadors : John de Piano Carpini 
and Nicholas Ascelin to Batu Khan, and Ruisbrock (Rubru- 
quis) to Mangu Khan at Karakorum. The last-named of 
these traveling missionaries has left us many clear and import- 
ant observations on the distribution of languages and races of 
men in the middle of the thirteenth century. He was the 
first who recognized that the Huns, the Baschkirs (inhabitants 
of Paskatir, the Baschgird of Ibn-Fozlan), and the Hungarians 
were of Finnish (Uralian) race ; and he even found Gothic 
tribes who still retained their language in the strong-holds of 
the Crimea. I Rubruquis excited the eager cupidity of the 

* Villemain, Milanges Historiques et Liltiraires, t. ii., p. 135. 

t The result of the investigations of the librarian Ludwig Wachler, 
at Breslau (see his Geschichte der Litleratur, 1833, th. i., s. 12-23). 
Printing without movable types does not go back, even in China, beyond 
the beginning of the tenth century of our era. The first four books of 
Confucius were printed, according to Klaproth, in the province of Sziit- 
schun, between 890 and 92.5 ; and the description of the technical manip- 
ulation of the Chinese printing-press might have been read in Western 
countries even as early as 1310, in Raschid-eddin's Persian history of 
the rulers of Khatai. According to the most recent results of the im- 
portant researches of Stauislas J ulien, however, an iron-smith in China 
itself, between the years 1041 and 1048 A.D., or almost 400 years before 
Guttenberg, would seem to have used movable types, made of burned 
clay. This is the inversion of Pi-sching, but it was not brought into 
application. 

X See the proofs in my Examen Crit., t. ii. p. 316-320. Josafat 
Barbaro (1436). and Ghislin von Busbech (J55f ), still found, between 

L 2 



250 COSMOS. 

great maritime nations of Italy — the Venet.ans and Genoese— 
by his descriptions of the inexhaustible treasures of Eastern 
Asia. He is acquainted with the *' silver walls and golden 
towers" of Quinsay, the present Hangtscheufu, although he 
does not mention the name of this great commercial mart, 
which twenty-five years later acquired such celebrity from 
Marco Polo, the greatest traveler of any age.* Truth and 
naive error are singularly intermixed in the Journal of Rubru- 
quis, which has been preserved to us by Roger Bacon. Near 
Khatai, which is bounded by the Eastern Sea, he describes a 
happy land, " where, on their arrival from other countries, all 
men and women cease to grow old."t 

More credulous than the monk of Brabant, and therefore, 
perhaps, far more generally read, was the English knight Sir 

Tana (Asof), CafFa, and the Erdil (the Volga), Alani and Gothic tribes 
speakmg German. (Ramusiu, Delle Navigationi et Viaggi,\o\. ii., p. 
92 b. and 98 a.) Roger Bacon merely terras Kubruquis trater Williel- 
mus, quern dominus Rex Francifc misit ad Tartaros. 

* The great and admirable work of Marco Polo {II Milione di Messer 
Marco Polo), as we possess it in the correct edition of Count Baldeili, 
is inappropriately termed the narrative of " Travels.^' It is, for the 
most part, a descriptive, one might say, a statistical work, in which it is 
difficult to distinguish what the traveler had seen himself, and what he 
had learned from others, and what he derived from topographical de- 
scriptions, in which the Chinese literature is so rich, and which might 
be accessible to him through his Persian interpreter. The striking 
similarity presented by the narratives of the travels of Hiuan-thsung, 
the Buddhistic pilgrim of the seventh century, to that which Marco 
Polo found in 1277 (respecting the Pamir-Highland), early attracted my 
svhole attention. Jacquet, who was unhappily too early removed by 
a premature death from the investigation of Asiatic languages, and who, 
like Klaproth and myself, was long occupied with the woz-k of the great 
Venetian traveler, wrote to me as follows shortly before his decease 
" I am as much struck as yourself by the composition of the Milione 
It is undoubtedly founded on the direct and personal observation of the 
traveler, but he probably also made use of documents either officially 
or privately communicated to him. Many things appear to have been 
borrowed from Chinese and Mongolian works, although it is difficult 
to determine their precise influence on the composition of the Milione, 
owing to the successive translations from which Polo took his extracts. 
While our modern travelers are only too well pleased to occupy their 
readers with their personal adventures, Marco Polo takes pains to blend 
his own observations with the official data communicated to him, of 
which, as governor of the city of Yangui, he was able to have a large 
number." (See my Asia Centrale, t. ii., p. 395.) The compiling 
method of the celebrated traveler likewise explains the possibility of 
his being able to dictate his book at Genoa in 1295 to his fellow-prison- 
er and friend, Messer Rustigielo of Pisa, as if the documents had been 
lying before him. (Compare Marsden, Travels of Marco Polo, p. 
xxxiii.) 

t Purchas, Pilgrims, Part iii., ch. 28 and 56 (p. 23 and 34). 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES 251 

John Mandevi]le. He describes India and China, Ceylon and 
Sumatra. The comprehensive scope and the individuahty of 
his narratives (hke the itineraries of Balducci Pigoletti and 
the travels of Roy Gonzalez de Clavijo) have contributed con- 
siderably to increase a disposition toward a great and general 
intercourse among different nations. 

It has often, and with singular pertinacity, been maintain 
ed, that the admirable work of the truthful Marco Polo, and 
more particularly the knowledge which it diffused regarding 
the Chinese ports and the Indian Archipelago, exercised great 
influence on Columbus, who is even asserted to have had a 
copy of Marco Polo's narratives in his possession during his 
first voyage of discovery.* I have already shown that Chris- 
topher Columbus and his son Fernando make mention of the 
Geography of Asia by ^neas Sylvius (Pope Pius II.), but 
never of Marco Polo or Mandeville. What they know of 
Quinsay, Zaitun, Mango, and Zipangu, may have been learn- 
ed from the celebrated letter of Toscanelh in 1474 on the fa- 
cility of reaching Eastern Asia from Spain, and from the re- 
lations of Nicolo de Conti, who was engaged during twenty- 
five years in traveling over India and the southern parts of 
China, and not through any direct acquaintance with the 
68th and 77th chapters of the second book of Marco Polo. 
The first printed edition of these travels was no doubt the 
German translation of 1477, which must have been alike un- 
intelligible to Columbus and to Toscanelh. The possibility 
of a manuscript copy of the narrative of the Venetian trav- 
eler being seen by Columbus between the years 1471 and 
1492, when he was occupied by his project of " seeking the 
east by the west" (buscar el levante por el poniente, pasar 
a donde nacen las especerias, navegando al occidente), can 
not certainly be denied ;t but wherefore, in a letter written to 
Ferdinand and Isabella from Jamaica, on the 7th of June, 
1503, in which he describes the coast of Veragua as a part 
of the Asiatic Ciguare near the Ganges, and expresses his 
hope of seeing horses with golden harness, should he not rath- 

* Navarrete, Coleccion de los Viages y Descuhrimientos que HiciSron 
for mar los Espanoles, t. \., p. 261 ; Washington Irving, History of the 
Life and Voyages of Christopher Columbus, 1828, vol. iv., p. 297. 

t Examen Crit. de V Hist, de la Giog., t. i., p. 63 and 215; t. ii., p. 
350. Marsden, Travels of Marco Polo, p. Ivii., Ixx., and Ixxv. The 
first German Nuremberg version of 1477 {Das huch des edeln R'Uters un 
landtfarers Marcho Polo) appeared in print in the life-time of Columbus, 
the first Latin translation in 1490, and the first Italian and Portuguesfl 
translations in 1496 and 1502. 



252 COSMOS. 

er refer to the Zipangu of Marco Polo than to that of Pops 
Pius? 

While the diplomatic missions of Christian monks, and the 
mercantile expeditions by land, which were prosecuted at a 
period when the universal dominion of the Moguls had made 
the interior of Asia accessible from the Dead Sea to the Wolga, 
were the means of difiusing a knowledge of Khatai and Zi- 
pangu (China and Japan) among the great sea-faring nations 
of Europe ; the mission of Pedro de Covilham and Alonzo de 
Payva (in 1487), which was sent by King John II. to seek 
for the African Prester John, prepared the way, if not lor Bar- 
tholomew Diaz, at all events for Vasco de Gama.* Trusting 
to the reports brought by Indian and Arabian pilots to Cali- 
cut, Goa, and Aden, as well as to Sofala, on the eastern shores 
of Africa, Covilham sent word to King John II., by two Jews 
from Cairo, that if the Portuguese would prosecute their voy- 
ages of discovery southward, along the west coast, they would 
reach the termination of Africa, from whence the navigation 
to the Moon Island, the Magastar of Polo, to Zanzibar and 
to Sofala, "rich in gold," would be extremely easy. But, be- 
fore this news reached Lisbon, it had been already long known 
there that Bartholomew Diaz had not only made the discov- 
ery of the Cape of Good Hope (Cabo tormentoso), but that he 
had also sailed round it, although only for a short distance.! 

* Barros, Dec. i., liv. iii., cap. 4, p. 190, says expressly that Barthol- 
omew Diaz, " e os de sua compauhia per causa dos perigos e tormentas, 
que em o dobrar delle passdram, Ihe pazeram uome Tormentoso." The 
merit of first doubling the Cape does not, therefore, belong, as usually 
stated, to Vasco de Gama. Diaz was at the Cape iu May, 1487, nearly, 
therefore, at the same time that Pedro de Covilham and Alonzo de Pay- 
va set forth from Barcelona on their expedition. In December of the 
tame year (1487), Diaz brought the news of this important discovery 
to Portugal. 

t The planispherium of Sanuto, who speaks of himself as " Marinus 
Sanuto, dictus Torxellus de Veneicis," appertain to the work entitled 
Secreta Jidelium Crucis. " Marinus ingeniously preached a crusade in 
the interest of commerce, with a desire of destroying the prosperity of 
Egypt, and directing the course of trade in such a manner as to carry 
the products of India through Bagdad, Bassora, and Tauris (Tebriz), to 
KaSa, Tana (Azow), and the Asiatic coasts of the Mediterranean. Sa- 
nuto, who was the cotemporaiy and compatriot of Polo, with whose MU- 
ione he was, however, unacquainted, was characterized by grand views 
regarding commercial policy. He may be regarded as the Raynal of 
the Middle Ages, without the incredulity of the philosophical abb6 of 
the eighteenth century." {Examen Critique, t. i., p. 231, 333-348.) 
The Cape of Good Hope is set down as Capo di Diab on the map of 
Fi-a Mauro, compiled between the years 1457 and 1459. Consult the 
learned treatise of Cardinal Zurla, entitled H Mappamundo di Fra 
Mauro Camaldolese, 1806, $ 54. 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 253 

Accounts of the Indian and Arabian trading places on the 
eastern shores of Africa, and of the configuration of the south- 
ern extremity of tho continent, may, indeed, early in the Mid- 
iJe Ages, have been transmitted to Venice through Egypt, 
Abyssinia, and Arabia. The triangular form of Africa is in- 
deed distinctly delineated as early as 1306, on the planisphe- 
rium of Sanuto, in the Genoese Portulano della Mediceo-Lau- 
renziana of 1351, discovered by Count Baldelli, and on the 
map of the world by Fra Mauro. I have briefly alluded to 
these facts, since the history of the contemplation of the uni- 
verse should indicate the epochs at which the principal details 
of the configuration of great continental masses were first 
recognized. 

While the gradually developed knowledge of relations in 
space incited men to think of shorter sea routes, the means for 
perfecting practical navigation were likewise gradually in- 
creased by the application of mathematics and astronomy, the 
invention of new instruments of measurement, and by a more 
skillful employment of magnetic forces. It is extremely prob- 
able that Europe owes the knowledge of the northern and 
southern directing powers of the magnetic needle — the use of 
the mariner's compass — to the Arabs, and that these people 
were in turn indebted for it to the Chinese. In a Chinese work 
(the historical Szuki of Szumathsian, a writer who lived in 
the earlier half of the second century before our era) we meet 
with an allusion to the "magnetic cars," which the Emperor 
Tsing-wang, of the ancient dynasty of the Tscheu, had given 
more than nine hundred years earlier to the embassadors from 
Tunkin and Cochin China, that they might not miss their way 
on their return home. In the third century of our era, under 
the dynasty of Han, there is a description given in Hiutschin's 
dictionary Schuewen of the manner in which the property of 
pointing with one end toward the south may be imparted to 
an iron rod by a series of methodical blows. Owing to the 
ordinary southern direction of navigation at that period, the 
south pointing of the magnet is always the one especially men- 
tioned. A century later, under the dynasty of Tsin, Chinese 
ships employed the magnet to guide their course safely across 
the open sea ; and it was by means of these vessels that the 
knowledge of the compass was carried to India, and from 
thence to the eastern coasts of Africa. The Arabic designa- 
tions Zohron and Apkron (south and north),* which Vincen 

* Avron, or avr (aur), is a more rarely employed term for north, used 
instead of the ordinary " schemdl ;^^ the Arabic Zohron, oi Zohr, from 



554 COSMOS. 

zius of Beauvais gives in his " Mirror of Nature" to the two 
ends of the magnetic needle, indicate, Hke many Arabic names 
of stars which we still employ, the channel, and the people 
from whom Western countries received the elements of their 
knowledge. In Christian Europe the first mention of the use 
of the magnetic needle occurs in the politico-satirical poem 
called La Bible, by Guyot of Provence, in 1190, and in the 
description of Palestine by Jacobus of Vitry, bishop of Ptole 
mais, between 1204 and 1215. Dante (in his Parad., xii., 
29) refers, in a simile, to the needle {ago), " which points to 
the star." 

The discovery of the mariner's compass was long ascribed 
to Flavio Gioja of Positano, not far from the lovely town of 
Amalfi, which was rendered so celebrated by its widely-ex- 
tended maritime laws ; and he may, perhaps, have made some 
improvement in its construction (1302). Evidence of the ear- 
lier use of the compass in European seas than at the beginning 
of the fourteenth century, is furnished by a nautical treatise of 
Raymond LuUy of Majorca, the singularly ingenious and ec- 
centric man whose doctrines excited the enthusiasm of Gior- 
dano Bruno when a boy,* and who was at once a philosoph- 
ical systematizer and an analytic chemist, a skillful mariner and 
a successful propagator of Christianity. In his book entitled 
Fenix de las Maravillas del Orbe, and published in 1286, 
Lully remarks, that the seamen of his time employed " instru- 
ments of measurement, sea charts, and the magnetic needle. "1 

which Klaproth erroneously endeavors to derive the Spanish sur and 
the Portuguese stil, which, without doubt, like the German siid, are true 
German words, does not properly refer to the particular designation of 
the quarter indicated ; it signifies only the time of high noon ; south is 
dschenub. On the early knowledge possessed by the Chinese of the 
south pointing of the magnetic needle, see Klaproth's important inves- 
tigations in his Lettre a M. A. de Humboldt, sur V Invention de la Bous' 
sole, 1834, p. 41, 45, 50, 66, 79, and 90; and the treatise of Azuni of 
Nice, which appeared in 1805, under the name of Dissertation sur VOr- 
igine de la Boussole, p. 35, and £5-68. Navarrete, in his Discurso 
Historico sohre los Progresos del Arte de Nave gar en Espana, 1802, p. 
28, recalls a remarkable passage in the Spanish Leyes de las Partidas 
(II., tit. ix., ley 28), of the middle of the thirteenth century: "The 
needle, which guides the seaman in the dark night, and shows him, 
both in good and in bad weather, how to direct his course, is the inter- 
mediary agent (medianera) between the loadstone {la piedra) and the 

north star " See the passage in Las siete Partidas del sabio 

Rey Don Alonso el IX. (according to the usually adopted chronolog- 
ical order Alonso the Xth), Madrid, 1829, t i., p. 473. 

* Jordano Bruno, par Christian Bartholomes, s. 1847, t. ii., p. 181- 
187. 

t " Tenian los mareantes instrumento, carta, compas y aguja." — Sal 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 256 

The early voyages of the Catalans to the north coast of Scot 
*aiid and the western shores of tropical Africa (Don Jayme 
Ferrer reaching the mouth of the Rio de Ouro, in the month 
of August, 1367), and the discovery of the Azores (the Bracir 
Islands, on the Atlas of Picigano, 1367) by the Northmen, 
remind us that the open Western Ocean was navigated long 
before the time of Columbus. The voyages prosecuted under 
the Roman dorninion in the Indian Ocean, between Ocelis and 
the coasts of Malabar, in reliance on the regularity of the di- 
rection of the winds,* were now conducted by the guidance of 
the magnetic needle. 

The application of astronomy to navigation was prepared 
by the influence exercised in Italy, from the thirteenth to the 
fifteenth centuries, by Andalone del Nero and John Bianchini, 
the corrector of the Alphonsine tables, and in Germany by 
Nicolaus de Cusa,t George von Peuerbach, and Regiomon- 
tanus. Astrolabes designed for the determination of time and 
of geographical latitudes by meridian altitudes, and capable of 
being employed at sea, underwent gradual improvement from 
the time that the astrolabium of the Majorcan pilots was in 
use, which is described by Raymond Lully,$ in 1295, in his 
Arte de Navegar, till the invention of the instrument made 
by Martin Behaim in 1484 at Lisbon, and which was, per- 
haps, only a simplification of the meteoroscope of his friend 
Regiomontanus. When the Infante Henry, duke of Viseo, 
who was himself a navigator, established an academy for pi- 
lots at Sagres, Maestro Jayme, of Majorca, was named its di- 
rector. Martin Behaim received a charge from King John 
II. of Portugal to compute tables for the sun's declination, 
and to teach pilots to " navigate by the altitudes of the sun 

azar, Discurso sobre los Progresos de la Hydrografia en Espana, 1809, 
p. 7. * See ante, p. 172. 

t Regarding Cusa (Nicolaus of Cuss, properly of Cues, oa the Moselle), 
see ante, p. 109, and also Clemens's treatise, Ueber Giordano Bruno und 
Nicolaus de Cusa, s. 97, where there is given an important fragment, 
written by Cusa's own hand, and discovered only three years since, re- 
specting a three-fold movement of the earth. (Compare, also, Chasles, 
Apergn sur V Origine des M6thodes en Giomitrie, 1807, p. 529.) 

t Navarrete, Dissertacion Historica sobre la parte que tuvieron los Es- 
panoles en las Giierras de Ultramar 6 de las Cruzadas, 1816, p. 100 ; and 
Examen Crit., t. i., p. 274-277. An important improvement in observ- 
ation, by the use of the plummet, has been ascribed to George von 
Peuerbach, the instructor of Regiomontanus. The plummet had, how- 
ever, long been employed by the Arabs, as we learn from Abul-Hassan- 
Ali's description of astronomical instruments written in the thirteenth 
century. Sedillot, Traits des Instrnmens Astronomiques des Arabes, 1835, 
p 379; 1841, p. 205. 



256 cosRios. 

and stars." It can not at present be decided whether, at th« 
close of the fifteenth century, the use of the log was known ag 
a means of estimating the distance traversed while the direc- 
tion is indicated by the compass ; but it is certain that Piga- 
fetta, the companion of Magellan, speaks of the log {la catena 
a poppa) as of a well-known means of measuring the course 
passed over.* 

* In all the writings on the art of navigation which I have examined, 
I have found the erroneous opinion that tho log for the measurement of 
the distance traversed was not used before the end of the sixteenth or 
the beginning of the seventeenth century. In the Encyclopcedia Bri- 
tannica (seventh edition, 1842), vol. xiii., p. 416, it is further stated, 
" The author of the device for measuring the ship's way is not known, 
and no mention of it occurs till the year 1607, in an East Indian voyage 

Sublished by Purchas." This year is also named in all earlier and later 
ictionaries as the extreme limit (Gehler, bd. vi., 1831, s. 450). Nav- 
arrete alone, in the DUsertacion sobre los Progresos del Arte de Navegar, 
1802, places the use of the log-line in English ships in the year 1577. 
(Duttot de Mofras, Notice Biographique sur Mendoza et Navarrete, 1845, 
p. 64.) Subsequently, in another place (Coleccion de los Viages de los 
Espanoles, t. iv., 1837, p. 97), he asserts that, "in Magellan's time, the 
speed of the ship was only estimated by the eye (a ojo), until, in the 
sixteenth century, the corredera (the log) was devised." The meas- 
urement of the distance sailed over by means of throwing the log, al- 
though this means must, in itself, be termed imperfect, has become of 
such great importance toward a knowledge of the velocity and direc- 
tion of oceanic currents, that I have been led to make it an object of 
careful investigation. I here give the principal results which are con- 
tained in the sixth (still unpublished) volume of my Examen Critique 
de V Histoire de la G6ographie et des Progres de V Astronomic Nautique. 
The Romans, in the time of the republic, had in their ships way-meas- 
urers, which consisted of wheels four feet high, provided with paddles 
attached to the outside of the ship, exactly as in our steam-boats, and as 
in the apparatus for propelling vessels, which Blasco de Garay had pro- 
posed, in 1543, at Barcelona to the Emperor Charles V. (Arago, An- 
nuaire du Bur. des Long., 1829, p. 152.) The ancient Roman way 
measurer (ratio a majoribus tradita, qua m via rheda sedentes vel mari 
navigantes scire possumus quot millia numero itineris fecerimus) is de- 
scribed in detail by Vitruvius (lib. x., cap. 14), the credit of whose Au- 
gustan antiquity has indeed been recently much shaken by C. Schultz 
and Osann. By means of three-toothed wheels acting on each other, 
and by the falling of small round stones from a wheel-case (loculamen- 
tum) having only a single opening, the number of revolutions of the 
outside wheels which dipped in the sea, and the number of miles pass- 
ed over in the day's voyage, were given. Vitruvius does not say 
whether these hodometers, whicn might afford " both use and pleas- 
ure," were much used in the Mediterranean. In the biography of the 
Emperor Pertinax by Julius Capitolinus, mention is made of the sale of 
the effects left by the Emperor Commodus, among which was a trav- 
eling carriage provided with a similar hodometric apparatus (cap. 8 in 
Hist. Augusta Script., ed. Lugd. Bat., 1671, t. i., p. 554). The wheela 
indicated both " the measure of the distance passed over, and the dura 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 2:^1 

The infiaence exercised by Arabian civilization through the 
astronomical schools of Cordova, Seville, and Granada, on the 

tion of the journey" in hours. A much more perfect way-measurer, 
used both on the water and on land, has been described by Hero of 
Alexandria, the pupil of Ctesibius, in his still inedited Greek manuscript 
on the Dioptra. (See Venturi, Comment supra la Storia delV Oltica, 
Bologna, 1814, t, i., p. 134-139.) There is nothing to be found on the 
subject we are considering in the literature of the Middle Ages until 
we come to the period of several " books of Nautical Instruction," writ- 
ten or printed in quick succession by Antonio Pigafetta ( Trattato di 
Navigazione, probably before 1530); Francisco Falero (1535, a brother 
of the astronomer Ruy Falero, who was to have accompanied Magellan 
on his voyage round the world, and left behind him a " Regimiento 
para observar la longitud en la mar") ; Pedro de Medina of Sevillo 
{Arte de Navegar, 1545) ; Martin Cortes of Bujalaroz {Breve Compendia 
de la esfera, y de la arte de Navegar, 1551) ; and Andres Garcia de Ces- 
pedes {Regimiento de Navigacion y Hidrografia, 1606). From almost 
all these works, some of which have become extremely rare, as well as 
from the Suma de Geografia, which Martin Fernandez de Enciso had 
published in 1519, we learn, most distinctly, that the " distance sailed 
over" is learned, in Spanish and Portuguese ships, not by any distinct 
measurement, but only by estimation by the eye, according to certain 
established principles. Medina says (libro iii., cap. 11 and 12), ** in 
order to know the course of the ship, as to the length of distance passed 
over, the pilot must set down in his register how much distance the 
vessel has made according to hours {i. e., guided by the hour-glass, am- 
polleta) ; and for this he must know that the most a ship advances in 
an hour is four miles, and with feebler breezes, three, or only two." 
Cespedes {Regimiento, p. 99 and 156) calls this mode of proceeding 
" echar punto por fantasia." This fantasia, as Enciso justly remarks, 
depends, if great errors are to be avoided, on the pilot's knowledge ot 
the qualities of his ship: on the whole, however, every one who has 
been long at sea will have remarked, with surprise, when the wavesj 
are not very high, how nearly the mere estimation of the ship's velocity 
accords with the subsequent result obtained by the log. Some Spanish 
pilots call the old, and, it must be admitted, hazardous method of mere 
estimation (cuenta de estima) sarcastically, and certainly very incor- 
rectly, " la corredera de los Holandeses, corredera de los perezosos." 
In Columbus's ship's journal, reference is frequently made to the dis- 
pute with Alonso Pinzon as to the distance passed over since their de- 
parture from Palos. The hour or sand glasses, ampolletas. which they 
made use of, ran out in half an hour, so that the interval of a day and 
night was reckoned at 48 ampolletas. We find in this important jour- 
nal of Columbus (as, for example, on the 22d of January, 1493): "an- 
daba 8 millas por hora hasta pasadas 5 ampolletas, y 3 antes que co- 
menzase la guardia, que eran 8 ampolletas." (Navarrete, t. i., p. 143.) 
No mention is ever made of the log (la corredera). Are we to assume 
that Columbus was acquainted with and employe! it, and that he did 
not think it necessary to name it, owing to its being already in very 
general use, in the same way that Marco Polo ha3 not mentioned tea, 
or the great wall of China? Such an assumption appears to me very 
improbable, because I find in the proposals made by the pilot, Don 
Jayme Ferrer, 1495, for the exact determination of the position of the 
papal fine of demarkation, that when there is a question regarding tha 



258 COSMOS. 

navigation of the Spaniards and Portuguese, can not be ovei&gt; 
looked. The great instruments of the schools of Bagdad and 
Cairo were imitated, on a small scale, for nautical purposes. 
Their names even were transferred ; thus, for instance, that 
of *• astrolabon " given by Martin Behaim to the main-mast, 
belongs originally to Hipparchus. When Vasco de Gama 
landed on the eastern coast of Africa, he found that the Indian 
pilots at Melinde were acquainted with the use of astrolabes 
and ballestilles.* Thus, by the more general intercourse con- 
sequent on increasing cosmical relations, by original inventions, 
and by the mutual fructification afforded by the mathematical 
and astronomical sciences, were all things gradually prepared 
for the discovery of tropical America ; the rapid determination 
of its configuration ; the passage round the southern point of 
Africa to India ; and, finally, the first circumnavigation of 
the globe — great and glorious events, which, in the space of 
thirty years (from 1492 to 1522), contributed so largely in ex- 
tending the general knowledge of the regions of the earth. 
The minds of men were rendered more acute and more capa- 
ble of comprehending the vast abundance of new phenomena 
presented to their consideration, of analyzing them, and, by 
comparing one with another, of employing them for the foun- 
dation of higher and more general views regarding the uni- 
verse. 

It will be sufl[icient here to touch upon the more prominent 
elements of these higher views, which were capable of lead- 
distance sailed over, the appeal is made only to the accordant judgment 
(juicio) of twenty very experienced seamen (" que apunten en sucar- 
ta de 6 en 6 horas el camino que la nao fai'd segun su juicio"). If the 
log had been in use, no doubt Ferrer w^ould have indicated how often 
it should be thrown. I find the first mention of the application of the 
log in a passage of Pigafetta's Journal of Magellan's voyage of circum 
navigation, which long lay buried among the manuscripts in the Am- 
brosian Library at Milan. It is there said that, in the month of Janu- 
ary, 1521, when Magellan had already arrived in the Pacific, " Secondo 
la misura che facevamo del viaggio colla catena a poppa, noi percorre- 
vamo da 60 in 70 leghe al giorno" (Amorelli, Primo Viaggio intorno 
al Globo Terracqueo, ossia Navigazione fatta dal Cavaliere Antonio 
Pigafetta sulla squadra del Cap. Magaglianes, 1800, p. 46). What 
can this arrangement of a chain at the hinder part of a ship (catena a 
poppa), " which we used throughout the entire voyage to measure the 
way," have been, except an apparatus similar to our log? No special 
mention is made of the log-line divided into knots, the ship's log, and 
the half-minute or log-glass, but this silence need not surprise us when 
reference is made to a long-known matter. In the part of the Trattato 
di Navigazione of the Cavalier Pigafetta, given by Amoretti in extracts, 
amounting, indeed, only to ten pages, the " catena della poppa" is not 
again mentioned. * Barros, Dec. i., liv. iv., p. 320 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 259 

ing men to a clearer insight into the connection of phenomena 
On entering into a serious consideration of the original works 
of the earhest writers of the history of the Conquista, we are 
surprised so frequently to discover the germ of important phys- 
ical truths in the Spanish writers of the sixteenth century 
At the sight of a continent in the vast waste of waters which 
appeared separated from all oth«r regions in creation, there 
presented themselves to the excited curiosity, both of the ear- 
liest travelers themselves and of those who collected their nar- 
ratives, many of the most important questions which occupy 
us in the present day. Among these were questions regarding 
the unity of the human race, and its varieties from one com- 
mon original type ; the migrations of nations, and the affinity 
of languages, which frequently manifest greater differences in 
their radical words than in their inflections or grammatical 
forms ; the possibility of the migration of certain species of 
plants and animals ; the cause of the trade winds, and of the 
constant oceanic currents ; the regular decrease of tempera- 
ture on the declivities of the Cordilleras, and in the superim- 
posed strata of water in the depths of the ocean ; and the re- 
ciprocal action of the volcanoes occurring in chains, and their 
influence on the frequency of earthquakes, and on the extent 
of circles of commotion. The ground-work of what we at 
present term physical geography, independently of mathemat- 
ical considerations, is' contained in the Jesuit Joseph Acosta's 
work, entitled Historia natural y moral de las Indias, and 
in the work by Gonzalo Hernandez de Oviedo, which appear- 
ed hardly twenty years after the death of Columbus. At no 
other period since the origin of society had the sphere of ideas 
been so suddenly and so wonderfully enlarged in reference to 
the external world and geographical relations ; never had the 
desire of observing nature at difl^erent latitudes and at different 
elevations above the sea's level, and of multiplying the means 
by which its phenon^.ena might be investigated, been more 
powerfully felt. 

We might, perhaps, as I have already elsewhere remark- 
ed,* be led to adopt the erroneous idea that the value of these 
great discoveries, each one of which reciprocally led to others, 
and the importance of these two-fold conquests in the physical 
and the intellectual world, would not have been duly appie- 
ciated before our own age, in which the history of civilization 
has happily been subjected to a philosophical mode of treat- 
ment. Such an assumption is, however, refuted by the cotem- 
* Examen Crit., t. i., p. 3-6 and 290. 



tiQO &lt;.OSMC s. 

poraries of Columbus. The most talented a Wong them fore- 
saw the influence which the events of the latter years of the 
fifteenth century would exercise on humanity. " Every day,'* 
writes Peter Martyr de Anghiera * in his letters Avritten in 
the years 1493 and 1494, " brings us new wonders from a new 
world — from those antipodes of the West — which a certain 
Genoese ( Chnstophorus quidam, vir Ligur) has discovered. 
Although sent forth by our monarchs Ferdinand and Isabella, 
he could with difficulty obtain three ships, since what he said 
was regarded as fabulous. Our friend Pomponius Laetus (one 
of the most distinguished promoters of classical learning, and 
persecuted at Rome for his religious opinions) could scarcely 
refrain from tears of joy when I communicated to him the first 
tidings of so unhoped-lbr an event." Anghiera, from whom 
we take these words, was an intelligent statesman at the 
court of Ferdinand the Catholic and of Charles V., once em- 
bassador at Egypt, and the personal friend of Columbus, Amer- 
igo Vespucci, Sebastian Cabot, and Cortez. His long life 
embraced the discovery of Corvo, the westernmost island of 
the Azores, the expeditions of Diaz, Columbus, Gama, and 
Magellan. Pope Leo X. read to his sister and to the car- 
dinals, " until late in the night," Anghiera's Oceanica. " I 
would wish never more to quit Spain," writes Anghiera, 
" since I am here at the fountain head of tidings of the new- 
ly-discovered lands, and where I may hope, as the histonan of 
such great events, to acquire for my name some renown with 
posterity. "t Thus clearly did cotemporaries appreciate the 

* Compare Opus Epistolarum Petri Martyy-is Anglerii Mediolanensis, 
1G70, ep. cxxx. and clii. " Praj liBtitia prosiliisse te vixque £i lachry- 
mis prue gaudio temperasse quando literas adspexisti meas, quibus de 
Autipodium Orbe, latenti hactenus, le certiorera feci, mi suavissime 
Pompoui, iiisinuasti. Ex tuis ipse literis coUigo, quid sensaris. Sen- 
sisti autera, tantique rem fecisti, quanti virum summa doclrina insigni- 
tum decuit. Quis namque cibus sublimibus praestari potest ingeuiis isto 
Buavior? quod coudimentum gratius ? a me facie coujecturara. Beari 
sentio spiritus meos, quaudo accitos alloquor prudentes aliquos ex his 
qui ab ea redeunt provincia (Hispaniola insula)." Tiie expression, 
" Christopliorus quidam Colonus," reminds us, I will not say of the too 
often and unjustly cited " nescio quis Plutarchus" of Aulus Gelliua 
{Noct. AtticcB, xi., 16), but certainly of the " quodam Cornelio scn- 
bente," in the answer written by the King Theodoric to the Prince .)f 
the iEstyans, who was to be informed of the true origin of amber, aa 
recorded in Tacitus, Germ., cap. 45. 

t Opvs EpistoL, No. ccccxxxvii. and dlxii. The remarkable and in 
telligent Hieronymus Cardanus, a magician, a fantastic enthusiast, and^ 
at the same time, an acute mathematician, also draws attention, in his 
" physical problems," to how much of our knowledge of the earth was 



CCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 261 

glory of events which will survive in the memory of the latest 
ages. 

Columbus, in sailing westward from the meridian of the 
Azores, through a wholly unexplored ocean, and applying the 
newly-improved astrolabe for the determination of the ship's 
place, sought Eastern Asia by a western course, not as a mere 
adventurer, but under the guidance of a systematic plan. lie 
certainly had with him the sea chart which the Florentine 
physician and astronomer, Paolo ToscaneUi, had sent him in 
1477, and which, fifty-three years after his death, was still in 
the possession of Bartholomew de las Casas.* It would ap- 

derived from facts, to the observation of which one man has led. — 
Cardani Opera, ed. Lugdun., 1663, t. ii., probl. p. 630 and 659, at nunc 
quibus te laudibus aflferam Christophore Columbi, noii familiiB tantura, 
non Genuensis urbis, non Italia? Provincia;, non Europae, partis orbis 
solum, sed humaui generis decus. I have been led to compare the 
" problems" of Cardauus vv^ith those of the latter Aristotelian school, 
because it appears to me remarkable, and characteristic of the sudden 
enlargement of geography at that epoch, that, amid the confusion and 
the feebleness of the physical explanations which prevail ahnost equal- 
ly in both collections, the greater part of these problems relate to com 
parative meteorology. I allude to the considerations on the warm in- 
sular climate of England contrasted with the winter at Milan ; on the 
dependence of hail on electric explosions ; on the cause and direction 
of oceanic currents ; on the maxima of atmospheric heat and cold oc- 
curring after the summer and winter solstices ; on the elevation of the 
region of snow under the tropics ; on the temperature dependent on 
the radiation of heat from the sun and from all the heavenly bodies ; 
on the greater intensity of light in the southern hemisphere, &amp;c. " Cold 
is merely absence of heat. Light and heat are only ditterent in name, 
and are in themselves insepaiable." Cardani Opp., t. i., De Vita Pro- 
pria, p. 40; t. ii., Probl. 621, 630-632, 653, and 713; t. iii.,i&gt;e Subtili- 
tate, p. 417. 

* See my Examen Cril., t. ii., p. 210-249. According to the manu- 
script, Historia General de las Indias, lib. i., cap. 12, " la carta de ma- 
rear que Maestro Paulo Fisico (ToscaneUi) envio 6 Colon" was in the 
hands of Bartholome de las Casas when he wrote his work. Colum- 
bus's ship's journal, of which we possess an extract (Navarrete, t. i., p. 
13), does not entirely agree with the relation which I find in a manu- 
script of Las Casas, for a communication of which. I am indebted to M. 
Ternaux Compans. The ship's journal says, '* Iba hablando el Almi- 
i-ante (martes 25 de Setiembre, 1492), con Martin Alonso Pinzon, capi- 
tal!, de la otra carabela Pinta, sobra una carta que le habia enviado tres 
dias hacia 4 la carabela, donde SL-gun parece tenia pintidat el Almirante 

ciertas islas por aquella mar " In the manuscript of Las Casas 

(lib. i., cap. 12), we find, on the other hand, as follows: " La carta de 
marear que embio (ToscaneUi al Almirante), yo que esta historia es- 
crivo la tengo en mi poder. Creo que todo su viage sobre esta carta 
fund6" (lib. i., cap. 38) ; " asi fu6 que el marte? 25 de Setiembre, llegase 
Martin Alonso Pinzon con su caravela Pinta k hablar con Christobal Co- 
.on, sobre una carta de marear que Cht'^tobal Colon leviaembiado .... 



262 COSMOS. 

peai from Las Casas's manuscript history, which I have ex- 
amhicd, that this was the same " carta de marear" which the 
admiral showed to Martin Alonso Pinzon on the 25th of Sep- 
tember, 1492, and on which many prominent islands were de- 
lineated. Had Columbus, however, alone followed the chart 
of his counselor and adviser, Toscanelli, he would have kept 
a more northern course in the parallel of Lisbon ; but instead 
of this, he steered half the way in the latitude of Gomera, 
one of the Canaries, in the hope of more speedily reaching 
Zipangu (Japan) ; and subsequently keeping a less high lati- 
tude, he found himself, on the 7th of October, 1492, in the 
parallel of 25° 30'. Uneasy at not discovering the coast of 
Zipangu, which, according to his reckoning, ought to lie 216 
nautical miles further to the east, he yielded, after long con- 
tention, to the commander of the caravel Pinta, Martin Alon- 
so Pinzon, of whom we have already spoken (one of three 
wealthy and influential brothers, hostile to him), and steered 
toward the southwest. This change of direction led, on the 
12th of October, to the discovery of Guanahani. 

We must here pause to consider the wonderful concatena- 
tion of trivial circumstances which undeniably exercised an 
influence on the course of the world's destiny. The talented 
and ingenious Washington Irving has justly observed, that if 
Columbus had resisted the counsel of Martin Alonso Pinzon, 
and continued to steer westward, he would have entered the 
Gulf Stream, and been borne to Florida, and from thence 
probably to Cape Hatteras and Virginia — a circumstance of 
incalculable importance, since it might have been the meana 
of giving to the United States of North America a Catholic 
Spanish population in the place of the Protestant English one 
by which those regions were subsequently colonized. " It 
seems to me like an inspiration," said Pinzon to the admiral, 
" that my heart dictates to me (el corazon me da) that we 
ought to steer in a diflerent direction." It was on the strength 
of this circumstance that in the celebrated lawsuit which Pin- 
zon carried on against the heirs of Columbus between 1513 
and 1515, he maintained that the discovery of America was 
alone due to him. This inspiration, emanating from the hed-rt, 

Esta carta es la que le embio Paulo Fisico el Florentin la qual yo tengo 
en mi poder con otras cosas del Almirante y escrituras de su misma mano 

que trax6ron d mi poder. En ella le pinto muchas islas " Are 

we to assume that the admiral had drawn upon the map of ToscaneUi 
the islands which he expected to reach, or would " tenia pintadas'* 
merely mean that " the admiral had a map on which these were paint» 
ed . . . . ?" 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 263 

Pinzon owed, as was related by an old sailor of Mognez, at 
the same trial, to the flight of a flock of parrots which he had 
observed in the evening flying toward the southwest, in order, 
as he might well have conjectured, to roost on trees on the 
land. Never has a flight of birds been attended by more im 
portant results. It may even be said that it has decided the 
first colonization in the New Continent, and the original dis- 
tribution of the Roman and Germanic races of man.* 

The course of great events, like the results of natural phe- 
nomena, is ruled by eternal laws, with few of which we have 
any perfect knowledge. The fleet which Emanuel, king of 
Portugal, sent to India, under the command of Pedro Alvarez 
Cabral, on the course discovered by Gama, was unexpectedly 
driven on the coast of Brazil on the 22d of April, 1500. From 
the zeal which the Portuguese had manifested, since the ex- 
pedition of Diaz in 1487, to circumnavigate the Cape of Good 
Hope, a recurrence of fortuitous circumstances similar to those 
exercised by oceanic currents on Cabral's ships cou'd hardly 
fail to manifest itself. The African discoveries would thus 
probably have brought about that of America sc/uth of the 
equator ; and thus Robertson was justified in saying that it 
was decreed in the destinies of mankind that the New Con- 
tinent should be made known to European navigators before 
the close of the fifteenth century. 

Among the characteristics of Christopher Columbus we 
must especially notice the penetration and acuteness with 
which, without intellectual culture, and without any knowl- 
edge of physical and natural science, he could seize and com- 
bine the phenomena of the external world. On his arrival in 
a new world and under a new heaven,t he examined with care 
the form of continental masses, the physiognomy of vegetation, 
the habits of animals, and the distribution of heat and the 
variations in terrestrial magnetism. While the old admiral 
strove to discover the spices of India, and the rhubarb [rtd- 
barba), which had already acquired a great celebrity through 

* Navarrete, Docnmenios,'No. 69, in t. iii. of the Viages y Discubr., p. 
565-571 ; Examen CriL, t. i., p. 234-249 and 252; t. iii., p. 158-165 
and 224. On the contested spot of the first landing in the West Indies, 
see t. iii., p. 186-222. The map of the world of Juan de la Cosa, made 
six years before the death of Columbus, which was discovered by Valck- 
enaer and myself in the year 1832, during the cholera epidemic, and has 
61 nee acquired so much celebrity, has thrown new light on these moot 
ed questions. 

t On the graphical and often poetical descriptions of nature found in 
Colitmbue, see ante, p. 66, 67. 



264 COSMOS5. 

the Arabian and Jewish physicians, ind through the account 
of Rubruquis and the Italian travelers, he also examined with 
the greatest attention the roots, fruits, and leaves of the differ- 
ent plants. In drawing attention to the influence exercised 
by this great age of nautical discoverers on the extension of 
natural views, we impart more animation to our descriptions, 
by associating them with the individuality of one great man. 
In the journal of his voyage, and in his reports, which were 
first published from 1825 to 1829, we find almost all those 
circumstances touched upon to which scientific enterprise was 
directed in the latter half of the fifteenth and throughout the 
whole of the sixteenth centuries. 

We need only revert generally and cursorily to the exten- 
sion imparted to the geography of Western nations from tho 
period when the Infante Dom Henrique the navigator, at his 
country seat of Terfa Naval, on the lovely bay of Sagres, 
sketched his first plan of discovery, to the expeditions of Gae- 
tano and Cabrillo to the South Sea. The daring expeditions 
of the Portuguese, Spaniards, and English evince the sudden 
ness with which a new sense, as it were, was opened for the 
appreciation of the grand and the boundless. The advance 
of nautical science and the application of astronomical methods 
to the correction of the ship's reckoning favored the efibrts 
which gave to this age its peculiar character, and revealed to 
men the image of the earth in all its completeness of form. 
The discovery of the main-land of tropical America (on the 
1st of August, 1498) occurred seventeen months after Cabot 
reached the Labrador coast of North America. Columbus 
did not see the terra firma of South America on the mount- 
ainous shores of Paria, as has generally been supposed, but at 
the Delta of the Orinoco, to the east of Caiio Macareo.* Se- 
bastian Cabott landed on the 24th of June, 1497, on the coast 
of Labrador, between 56° and 58° north latitude. It has al- 
ready been noticed that this inhospitable region had been visit- 
ed by the Icelander Leif Ericksson, five hundred years earlier. 

Columbus attached more importance on his third voyage to 
the circumstance of finding pearls in the islands of Margarita 
and Cabagua than to the discovery of the tierra firme, for he 
continued firmly persuaded to the day of his death that he had 

* See the results of my investigations, in the Relation Hist, du Voy- 
mge aux Regions Equinoxiales du Nouvean Continent, t. ii., p. 702 ; anU 
in the Examen Crit. de V Hist, de la Giographie, t. i., p. 309. 

t Biddle, Memoir of Sebastian Cabot, 1831, p. 52-61 ; Examen Cnt^ 
I. iv., p. 231. 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 265 

already touched a portion of the continent cf Asia when on 
his first voyage he reached Cuba, in November, 1492.* From 
this point, as his son Don Fernando, and his friend the Cura 
de los Palacios, relate, he proposed, if he had provisions enough, 
*' to continue his course westward, and to return to Spain 
either by water, by way of Ceylon (Taprobane) rodeando todo 
la tierra de los Negros, or by land, through Jerusalem and 
Jaffa. "t Such were the projects by which the admiral, in 
1494, proposed to circumnavigate the globe, four years before 
VasQo de Gama, and twenty-seven years before Magellan and 
Sebastian de Elcano. The preparations for Cabot's second 
voyage, in which he penetrated through blocks of ice to 67° 
30' north latitude, and endeavored to find a northwest passage 
to Cathai (China), led him to think at " some future time of 
an expedition to the north pole" {d lo del polo arctico).X The 
more it became gradually recognized that the newly-discover- 
ed land constituted one connected tract, extending from Lab- 
rador to the promontory of Paria, and as the recently-found 
map of Juan de la Cosa (1500) testified, beyond the equator, 
far into the southern hemisphere, the more intense became the 
desire of finding some passage either in the south or in the 
north. Next to the rediscovery of the continent of America 
and the knowledge of the extension of the new hemisphere 
southward froai Hudson's Bay to Cape Horn, discovered by 
Garcia Jofre de Loaysa,^ the knowledge of the South Pacific, 

* In a portion of Columbus's Journal, Nov. 1, 1492, to which but little 
attention has been directed, it is stated, " I have (in Cuba) opposite, 
and near to me, Zayto y Gainsay (Zaitun and Quinsay, Marco Polo, ii., 
77) of the Gran Can." — Navarrete, Viages y Descubrim. de los Espa- 
noles, t. i., p. 46. The curvature toward the south, which Columbus, 
on his second voyage, remarked in the most western part of the coast 
of Cuba, had an important influence, as I have elsewhere observed, on 
the discovery of South America, and on that of the Delta of the Orinoco 
and Cape Paria. See Examen Crit., t. iv., p. 246-250. Anghiera 
(Epist., clxviii., ed. Amst., 1670, p. 96^ writes as follows: " Putat 
(Colonus) regiones has (Pariae) esse CuDae conti^uas at adheerentes : 
ita quod utraeque sint Indise Gangetidis continens ipsum " 

t See the important manuscript of Andres Bernaldez, Cura de la villa 
de los Palacios {Historia de los Reyes Catolicos, cap. 123). This history 
comprises the years from 1488 to 1513. Bernaldez had received Colum- 
bus into his house, in 1496, on his return from his second voyage. 
Through the special kindness of M. Ternaux Compans, to whom the 
History of the Conquista owes much important elucidation, I was ena- 
bled at Paris, in Dec, 1838, to make a free use of this manuscript, which 
was in the possession of my distinguished friend the historiographer 
Don J aan Bautista Munoz. (Compare Fern. Colon, Vida del Almirante, 
cap. 56.) t Examen Crit., t. iii., p. 244-248. 

$ Cape Horn was discovered by Francisco de Hoces in February, 1526 
Vol. TI ^-M 



266 COSMOS. 

which ba\'hes the western shores of America, was the most 
important cosmical event of the g^reat epoch which we are 
here describing. 

Ten years before Balboa, on the 25th of September, 1513, 
first caught sight of the Pacific from the heights of the Sierra 
de Quarequa at the Isthmus of Panama, Columbus distinctly 
learned, when he was coasting along the eastern shores of Ve- 
ragua, that to the west of this land there was a sea " which 
in less than nine days' sail would bear ships to the Chersone- 
sus aurea of Ptolemy and to the mouth of the Ganges." In 
the same Ca7'ta rarissi77ia, which contains the beautiful and 
poetic narration of a dream, the admiral says, that " the op- 
posite coasts of Veragua, near the Rio de Belen, are situater^ 
relatively to one another as Tortosa on the Mediterranean, 
and Fuenterrabia in Biscay, or as Venice and Pisa." The 
great ocean, the South Pacific, was even at that time regard- 
ed as merely a continuation of the Sinus magnus (fisyag 
KoXnog) of Ptolemy, situated before the golden Chersonesus, 
while Cattigara and the land of the Sines (Thinse) were sup- 
posed to constitute its eastern boundary. The fanciful hypoth- 
esis of Hipparchus, according to which this eastern shore of 
the great gulf was connected with the portion of the African 
continent which extended far toward the east,* and thus sup- 
posed to make a closed inland sea of the Indian Ocean, was 
but little regarded in the Middle Ages, notwithstanding the 
partiality to the views of Ptolemy — a fortunate circumstance. 

in the expedition of the Comraendador Garcia de Loaysa, which, follow 
ing tliatof Magellan, was destined to proceed to the Molnccas. While 
Loaysa was passing through the Straits of Magellan, Hoces, with his 
caravel, the San Lesmes, was separated from the flotilla, and driven as 
far as 55^ south latitude. " Dijeron los del buque, que les parecia que 
era alii acabamiento de tierra." (Navarrete, Viages de los Espanoles, 
t. v., p. 28 and 404-488.) Fleurieu maintains that Hoces only saw the 
Oabo del Buen Succeso, west of Staten Island. Toward the end of the 
sixteenth century, such a strange uncertainly again prevailed respect- 
ing the form of the land, that the author of the Araucana (canto i., oct. 
9) believed that the Magellanic Straits had closed by an earthquake, 
and by the upheaval of the bottom of the sea, while, on the other han^ 
Acosta (Hisioria Natural y Moral delas India8,\ih. iii.,cap. 10) regard- 
ed the Terra del Fuego as the beginning of a great south polar land. 
(Compare, also, ante, p. 72.) 

* Whether the isthmus hypothesis, according to which Cape Prasum, 
on the eastern shore of Africa, was connected with the eastern Asiatic 
isthmus of Thinae, is to be traced to Marinusof Tyre, or to Hipparchua, 
or to the Babylonian Seleucus, or rather to Aristotle, De Ccelo (ii., 14), 
18 a question treated in detail in another work, Examen Cril.* t i., p 
144, leiiand 329} t. ii., p. 37b-3r2. 



OCEANIC DISCO VERIK8. 267 

when we consider the unfavorable infiucnce which it would 
doubtlessly have exercised on the direction of great maritime 
enterprises. 

The discovery and navigation of the Pacific indicate an 
epoch which was so much the more important with respect 
to the recognition of great cosmical relations, since it was ow- 
ing to these events, and therefore scarcely three centuries and 
a half ago, that not only the configuration of the western coast 
of the New, and the eastern coast of the Old Continent were 
determined ; but also, what is far more important to meteor- 
ology, that the numerical relations of the area of land and 
water upon the surface of our planet first began to be freed 
from the highly erroneous views with which they had hitherto 
been regarded. The magnitude of these areas, and their rela- 
tive distribution, exercise a powerful influence on the quantity 
of humidity contained in the atmosphere, the alternations in 
the pressure of the air, the force and vigor of vegetation, the 
greater or lesser distribution of certain species of animals, and 
on the action of many other general phenomena and physical 
processes. The largei area apportioned to the fluid over th&lt;» 
solid parts of the earth's crust (in the ratio of 2^ths to 1), doe* 
certainly diminish the habitable surface for the settlements o* 
the human race, and for the nourishment of the greater por 
tion of mammalia, birds, and reptiles ; but it is nevertheless, 
in accordance with the existing laws of organic life, a benefi- 
cent arrangement, and a necessary condition for the preserva- 
tion of all living beings inhabiting continents. 

When, at the close of the fifteenth century, a keen desire 
was awakened for discovering the shortest route to the Asiatic 
spice lands, and when the idea of reaching the ea-st by sailing 
to the west simultaneously awoke in the minds of two intel- 
lectual men of Italy — the navigator Christopher Columbus, 
and the physician and astronomer Paul Toscanelli* — the 
opinion established in Ptolemy's Almagest still prevailed, that 
the Old Continent occupied a space extending over 180 equa- 
torial degrees from the western shore of the Iberian peninsula 
to the meridian of Eastern Sinae, or that it extended from east 

♦ Paolo Toscanelli was so greatly distinguished as an astronomer, 
that Behaim's teacher, Regiomontanus, dedicated to him, in 1463, hia 
work De Quadratura Circuli, directed against the Cardinal Nicolaus de 
Cusa. He constructed the great gnomon in the church of Santa Maria 
Novella at Florence, and died in 1482, at the age of 85, without having 
lived long enough to enjoy the pleasure of learning the discovery of the 
Cape of Good Hope by Diaz, and that of the tropical part of the New 
Continent by Columbus. 



208 COSMOS. 

to west over half of the globe. Columbus, misled by a long 
Beries of false inferences, extended this space to 240 degrees, 
and in his eyes the desired eastern shores of Asia appeared to 
advance as far as the meridian of San Diego in New Califor- 
nia. He therefore hoped that he should only have to sail 120 
degrees instead of the 231 degrees at which the wealthy Chi- 
nese commercial city of Quinsay is actually situated to the 
west of the extremity of the Spanish peninsula. Toscanelii, 
in his correspondence with the admiral, diminished the ex- 
panse of the fluid element in a manner still more remarkable 
and more favorable to his designs. According to his calcula- 
tions, the extent of the sea between Portugal and China was 
limited to 52 degrees, so that, in conformity with the expres-' 
sion of the Prophet Esdras, six sevenths of the earth were dry. 
Columbus, at a subsequent period, in a letter which he ad- 
dressed to Queen Isabella from Haiti, immediately after the 
completion of his third voyage, showed himself the more in- 
clined to these views, because they had been defended in the 
Imago Mundi by Cardinal d'Ailly, whom he regarded as the 
highest authority.* 

* As the Old Continent, from the western extremity of the Iberian 
peninsula to the coast of China, comprehends almost 130'-' of longitude, 
there remain about 230° for the distance which Columbus would have 
had to traverse if he wished to reach Cathai (China), but less if he only 
desired to reach Zipangu (Japan). This diiference of 230°, which 1 
have here indicated, depends on the position of the Portuguese Cape 
St. Vincent (11° 20' W. of Paris), and the far projecting part of the 
Chinese coast, near the then so celebrated port of Quinsay, so often 
named by Columbus and Toscanelii (lat. 30° 28', long. 117° 47' E. of 
Paris). The synonyms for Quinsay, in the province of Tschekiang, are 
Kanfu, Hangtscheufu, Kingszu. The East Asiatic general commerce 
was shared in the thirteenth century between Quinsay and Zaitun 
(Pinghai or Sseuthung), opposite to the island of Formosa (then Tung- 
fan), in 25° 5' N. lat. (see Klaproth, Tableaux Hist, de VAsie, p. 227). 
The distance of Cape St. Vincentfrom Zipangu (Niphon) is 22° of longi- 
tude less than from Quinsay, therefore about 209° instead of 230° 53'. 
It is striking that the oldest statements, those of Eratosthenes and Strabo 
(lib. i., p. 64), come, through accidental compensations, within 10° of 
the above-mentioned result of 129° for the diflference of longitude of 
the OLKovfiivT]. Strabo, in the same passage in which he alludes to the 

Eossible existence of two great habitable continents in the northern 
emisphere, says that our oLKOVfiivr], in the parallel of Thinae, Athei^ 
(see p. 189), constitutes more than one third of the earth's circumference. 
Marinus the Tynan, misled by the length of the time occupied in tno 
navigation from Myos Hormos to India, by the erroneously assumed di 
rection of the major axis of the Caspian from west to east, and by the 
over-estimation of the length of the land route to the country of the 
Seres, ^ave to the Old Continent a breadth of 225° instead of 129° 
The Chmese coast was thus advanced to the Sandwich Islands. Colura- 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 269 

Six years after Balboa, sword in hand, and wading to his 
knees through the waves, claimed the possession of the Pacific 
for Castile, and two years after his head had fallen by the 
hand of the executioner in the revolt against th« tyrannical 
Pedrarias Davila,* Magellan appeared in the Pacific (27th 
of November, 1520), and, traversing the vast ocean from south- 
bus naturally preferred this result to that of Ptolemy, according to which 
Quinsay should have been found in the naeridian of the eastern part of 
the archipelago of the Carolinas. Ptolemy, in the Almagest (II., 1), 
places the coast of Sinse at 180^^, and in his Geop-aphy (lib. i., cap. 12) 
at 177^"^. As Columbus estimated the navigation from Iberia to Sinae 
at 120^^, and Toscauelli at only 52°, they might certainly, estimating 
the length of the Mediterranean at about A&lt;P, have called this appar 
ently hazardous enterprise a " brevissimo camino." Martin Behaim, 
also, on his " World Apple,'' the celebiated globe virhich he completed 
in 1492, and which is still preserved in the Behaim house at Nurem- 
berg, places the coast of China (or the throne of the King of Mango, 
Cambalu, and Cathai) at only 100° west of the Azores — i. e., as Behaim 
lived four years at Fayal, and probably calculated the distance from 
that point — 119° 40' west of Cape St. Vincent. Columbus was prob- 
ably acquainted with Behaim at Lisbon, where both lived from 1480 
to 1484. (See my Examen Crit. de CHist. d,e la Geographic, t. ii., p. 
357-369.) The many wholly erroneous numbers which we find in all 
the writings on the discovery of America, and the then supposed extent 
of Eastern Asia, have induced me more carefully to compare the opin- 
ions of the Middle Ages with those of classical antiquity. 

* The eastern portion of the Pacific was first navigated by white men ia 
a boat, when Alonso Martin de Don Benito (who had seen the sea horizon 
with Vasco Nunez de Balboa on the 25th of September, 1513, from the 
little Sierra de Quarequa) descended a few days afterward to the Gulf 
de San Miguel, before Balboa enacted the strange ceremony of takinr 
possession of the ocean. Seven months befora, in the month of January, 
1513, Balboa had announced to his court that the South Sea, of which 
he had heard from the natives, was very easy to navigate : " mar muy 
mansa y que nunca anda brava como la mar de nuestra banda" (de las 
Antillas). The name Oceano Pacifico was, however, as Pigafetta tells 
us, first given by Magellan to the Mar del Sur (Balboa). Before Ma- 
gellan's expedition (in August, 1519), the Spanish government, which 
was not wanting in watchful activity, had given secret orders, in Novem- 
ber, 1514, to Pedrarias Davila, governor of the province of Castilla del 
Oro (the most northwestern part of South America), and to the great 
navigator Juan Diaz de Solis, for the former to have four caravels built 
in the Golfo de San Miguel, " to make discovei'ies in the newly-discov- 
ered South Sea:" and to the latter, to seek for an opening ("abertura 
de la tierra") from the eastern coast of America, with the view of ar- 
riving at the back (" d espel das") of the new country, i. e., of the 
western portion of Castilla del Oro, which was surrounded by the sea. 
The expedition of Solis (October, 1515, to August, 1516) led him far to 
the south, and to the discoveiy of the Rio de la Plata, long called the 
Rio de Solis. (Compare, on the little known first discovery- of the 
Pacific, Petrus Martyr, Epist., dxl., p. 296, with the documents of 
1513-1515, in Navarrete, t. iii., p. 134 and 357; also my Examen Crit^ 
t i., p. 320 and 350.) 



270 COSMOS. 

east to northwest, in a course of more than ten thousand geo 
graphical miles, by a singular chance, before he discovered the 
Marianas (his Mas de los Ladrones, or de las Velas Latinas) 
and the Philippines, saw no other land but two small unin- 
habited islands (the Desventuradas, or unfortunate islands), 
one of which, if we may believe his journal and his ship's reck- 
oning, lies east of the Low Islands, and the other somewhat 
to the southwest of the Archipelago of Mendana.* Sebastian 
de Elcano completed the first circumnavigation of the earth 
in the Victoria after Magellan's murder on the island of Zebu, 
and obtained as his armorial bearings a globe, with the glo- 
rious inscription. Primus drcunidedisti me. He entered the 
harbor of San Lucar in the month of September, 1522, and 
scarcely had a year elapsed before the Emperor Charles, stim- 
ulated by the suggestions of cosmographers, urged, in a letter 
to Hernan Cortez, the discovery of a passage " by which the 
distance to the spice lands would be shortened by two thirds." 
The expedition of Alvaro de Saavedra was dispatched to the 
Moluccas from a port of the province Zacatula, on the west- 
ern coast of Mexico. Hernan Cortez writes in 1527 from the 
recently conquered Mexican capital, Tenochtitlan, " to the 
Kings of Zebu and Tidor in the Asiatic island world." So 
rapidly did the sphere of cosmical views enlarge, and with it 
the animation of general intercourse ! 

Subsequently, the conqueror of New Spain himself entering 
upon a course of discoveries in the Pacific, proceeded from 
thence in search of a northeast passage. Men could not ha- 
bituate themselves to the idea that the continent extended 
aninterruptedly from such high southern to such high north- 

* On the geographical position of the Desventuradas (San Pablo, S. 
lat. 16i°, long. 135|o west of Paris; Isla de Tiburones, S. lat. IQ\^ 
W. long. 145°), see my Examen Crit., t. i., p. 286, and Navarrete, t 
iv., p. lix., 52, 218, and 267. The great period of geographical discov- 
eries gave occasion to many illustrious heraldic bearings, similar to the 
one mentioned in the text as bestowed on Sebastian de Elcano and his 
descendants (the terrestrial globe, with the inscription " Primus cir 
cumdedisti me"). The arms which were given to Columbus as early 
as May, 1493, to honor his person, "para sublimarlo," with posterity, 
contain the first map of America — a range of islands in front of a gulf 
(Oviedo, Hist. General de las Indias, ed. de 1547, lib. ii., cap. 7, fol. 
10 a.; Navairete, t. ii., p. 37 ; Examen Crit., t. iv., p. 236). The Em- 
peror Charles V. gave to Diego de Ordaz who boasted of having ascend- 
ed the volcano of Orizaba, the drawing of that conical mountain; and 
to the historian Oviedo (who lived in tropical America uninteiTuptedly 
for thirty-four years, from 1513 to 1547), the four beautiful stars of tha 
Southern Cross, as armorial bearings. (Oviedo, lib. ii., cap. 11, foL 
16,b.'» 



OCliANIC DISCOVERIES. 271 

rrii latitudes. When tidings arrived from the coast of Cali- 
fornia that the expedition of Cortez had perished, the wife of 
the hero, Juana de Zuiiiga, the beautiful daughter of the 
Count d'Aguilar, caused two ships to be fitted out and sent 
forth to ascertain its fate.* Caliibrnia was already, in 1541, 
recognized to be an arid, woodless peninsula — a fact that w^as 
forgotten in the seventeenth century. We moreover gather 
from the narratives of Balboa, Pedrarias Davila, and Hern an 
Cortez, that hopes were entertained at that period of finding 
in the Pacific, then considered to be a portion of the Indian 
Ocean, groups of islands, rich in spices, gold, precious stones, 
and pearls. Excited fancy urged men to undertake great en- 
terprises, and the daring of these undertakings, whether suc- 
cessful or not, reacted on the imagination, and excited it still 
more powerfully. Thus, notwithstanding the thorough ab- 
sence of political freedom, many circumstances concurred at 
this remarkable age of the Conquista — a period of overwrought 
excitement, violence, and of a mania for discoveries by sea and 
land — to favor individuality of character, and to enable some 
highly-gifted minds to develop many noble germs drawn from 
the depths of feeling. They err who believe that the Con- 
quistadores were incited by love of gold and religious fanati 
cism alone. Perils always exalt the poetry of life ; and, more- 
over, the remarkable age, whose influence on the development 
of cosmical ideas we are now depicting, gave to all enterprises, 
and to the natural impressions awakened by distant travels, 
the charm of novelty and surprise, which is beginning to fail 
us in the present well-instructed age, when so many portions 
of the earth are opened to us. Not only one hemisphere, but 
almost two thirds of the earth, were then a new and unex- 
plored world, as unseen as that portion of the moon's surface 
which the law of gravitation constantly averts from the glance 
of the inhabitants of the earth. Our deeply-inquiring age 
finds in the increasing abundance of ideas presented to the 
human mind a compensation for the surprise formerly induced 
by the novelty of grand, massive, and imposing natural phe- 
nomena — a compensation which will, it is true, long be de- 
nied to the many, but is vouchsafed to the few familiar with 
the condition of science. To them the increasing insight into 
the Bilent operation of natural forces, whether in electro-mag- 
netism or in the polarization of light, in the influence of dia- 

* See my Essai Politique sur Ic Royaume de la Nouvelle Espagne, t. 
H., 1827, p. 259 ; and Prescott, History of the Conquest of Mexico (New 
Vork. 1843). vol. iii., p 271 and 336. 



272 COSMOS. 

thermal substances or in the physiological phenomena of vital 
organisms, gradually unvails a world of wonders, of which we 
have scarcely reached the threshold. 

The Sandwich Islands, Papua or New Guinea, and some 
portions of New Holland, were all discovered in the early half 
of the sixteenth century.* These discoveries prepared the way 
for those of Cabrillo, Sebastian Vizcaino, Mendaiia, and Quiros, 
whose Sagittaria is Tahiti, and whose Archipelago del Espiritu 
Santo is the same as the New Hebrides of Cook.f Quiros was 
accompanied by the bold navigator who subsequently gave his 
name to the Torres Straits. The Pacific no longer appeared 
as it had done to Magellan, a desert waste ; it was now ani- 
mated by islands, which, however, for want of exact astro- 
nomical observations, appeared to have no fixed position, but 
floated from place to place over the charts. The Pacific re- 
mained for a long time the exclusive theater of the enterprises 
of the Spaniards and Portuguese. The important South In- 
dian Malayan Archipelago, dimly described by Ptolemy, Cos 
mas, and Polo, unfolded itself in more distinct outlines after 
Albuquerque had established himself in 1511 in Malacca, and 
after the expedition of Anton Abreu. It is the special merit 
of the classical Portuguese historian, Barros, the cotemporary 
of Magellan and Camoens, to have so truly recognized the phys- 
ical and ethnological character of this archipelago, as to be 
the first to propose that the Australian Polynesia should be 
distinguished as a fifth portion of the earth. It was not un- 
til the Dutch power acquired the ascendency in the Moluccas 

* Gaetano discovered one of the Sandwich Islands in 1542. Re- 
specting the voyage of Don Jorge de Menezes (1526), and that of Al» 
varo de Saavedra (1528), to the Ilhas de Papuas, see Barros, Da Asia, 
Dec. iv., liv. i., cap. 16; and Navarrete, t. v., p. 125. The '^ Hydrog-^ 
rapky'^ of Joh. Rotz (1542), which is pi*eserved in the British Mu- 
seum, and has been examined by the learned Dalrymple, contains out- 
lines of New^ Holland, as does also the collection of maps of Jean Valard 
of Dieppe (1552), for the first knowledge of which we are indebted to 
M. Coquebert Monbret. 

t After the death of Mendana, his wife, Dona Isabela Bauetos, a 
woman distinguished for personal courage and great mental endow- 
ments, undertook in the Pacific the command of the expedition, which 
did not terminate until 1596 {Essai Polit. sur la Nouv. Esp., t. iv., p. 

Quiros practiced in his ships the distillation of fresh from salt water 
on a considerable scale, and his example was followed in several in- 
stances (Navarrete, t. i., p. liii.). The entire operation, as I have else- 
where shown on the testimony of Alexander of Aphrodisias, was 
known as early as the third century of our era, although it was not 
then practiced in ships. 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 273 

that Anstralia began to emerge from its former obscurity, and 
to assume a definite form in the eyes of geographers. * Now 
began the great epoch of Abel Tasman. We do not purpose 
here to give the history of individual geographical discoveries, 
but simply to refer to the principal events by which, in a short 
space of time and in continuous connection, two thirds of the 
earth's surface were opened to the apprehension of men, in 
consequence of the suddenly awakened desire to reach the 
wide, the unknown, and the remote regions of our globe. 

An enlarged insight into the nature and the laws of phys- 
ical forces, into the distribution of heat over the earth's sur- 
face, the abundance of vital organisms and the limits of their 
distribution, was developed simultaneously with this extended 
knowledge of land and sea. The advance which the different 
branches of science had made toward the close of the Middle 
Ages (a period which, in a scientific point of view, has not 
been sufficiently estimated), facilitated and furthered the sens- 
uous apprehension and the comparison of an unbounded mass 
of physical phenomena now simultaneously presented to the 
observation of men. The impressions were so much the 
deeper and so much the more capable of leading to the estab- 
lishment of cosmical laws, because the nations of Western 
Europe, even before the middle of the sixteenth century, had 
explored the New Continent, at least along its coasts, in the 
most different degrees of latitude in both hemispheres ; and be- 
cause it was here that they first became firmly settled in the 
region of the equator, and that, owing to the singular 'jonfigu- 
ration of the earth's surface, the most striking contrasts of veg- 
etable organizations and of climate were presented to them at 
dirferent elevations within very circumscribed limits of space. 
If I again take occasion to allude to the advantages presented 
by the mountainous districts of the equinoctial zone, I would 
observe, in justification of my reiteration of the same senti- 
ment, that to the inhabitants of these regions alone it is grant- 
ed to behold all the stars of the heaven, and almost all fami- 
lies and forms of vegetation ; but to behold is not to observe 
by a mental process of comparison and combination. 

Although in Columbus, as I hope I have succeeded in show- 
ing in another work, a capacity for exact observation was de- 
veloped in manifold directions, notwithstanding his entire de 
liciency of all previous knowledge of natural history, and sole- 
ly by contact with great natural phenomena, we must by no 

• See the excellent work of Professor Meinecke of Prenzlau, entitled 
Vas Ftitland Australien, eine Geogr. Monographic, 1837, th. i,, s. 2-10 

M2 



274 COSMOS. 

means assume % similar development in the rough and war- 
like body of ihi Conquistadores. Europe owes to another and 
more peaceful class of travelers, and to a small number of dis- 
tinguished men among municipal functionaries, ecclesiastics, 
and physicians, that which it has unquestionably acquired by 
the discovery of America, in the gradual enrichment of its 
knowledge regarding the character and composition of the at- 
mosphere, and its action on the human organization ; the dis- 
tribution of climates on the declivities of the Cordilleras ; the 
elevation of the line of perpetual snow in accordance with the 
different degrees of latitude in both hemispheres ; the succes- 
sion of volcanoes ; the limitation of the circles of commotion 
in earthquakes ; the laws of magnetism ; the direction of 
oceanic currents ; and the gradations of new animal and veg- 
etable forms. The class of travelers to whom we have allud- 
ed, by residing in native Indian cities, some of which were 
situated twelve or thirteen thousand feet above the level of 
the sea, were enabled to observe with their own eyes, and, by 
a continued residence in those regions, to test and to combnie 
the observations of others, to collect natural products, and to 
describe and transmit them to their European friends. It 
M^ill suffice here to mention Gomara, Oviedo, Acosta, and 
Hernandez. Columbus brought home from his first voyage 
of discovery some natural products, as, for instance, fruits, and 
the skins of animals. In a letter written from Segovia (Au- 
gust, 1494), Queen Isabella enjoins on the admiral to perse- 
vere in his collections ; and she especially requires of him that 
he should bring with him specimens of " all the coast and 
forest birds peculiar to countries which have a different cli- 
mate and different seasons." Little attention has hitherto 
been given to the fact that Martin Behaim's friend Cada- 
mosto procured for the Infante Henry the Navigator black ele- 
phants' hair a palm and a half in length, from the same west- 
ern coast of Africa whence Hanno, almost two thousand years 
earlier, had brought the " tanned skins of wild women " (of 
the large Gorilla apes), in order to suspend them in a temple. 
Hernandez, the private physician of Philip II., and sent by 
that monarch to Mexico, in order to have all the vegetable 
and zoological curiosities of the country depicted in accurate 
and finished drawings, was able to enlarge his collection by 
copies of many very carefully executed historical pictures, 
which had been painted at the command of Nezahualcoyotl, 
a king of Tezcuco,* half a century before the arrival of the 
• This kiug died in tho time of the Mexican king Axayacatl, whj 



OCEAN xC DISCOVERIES. 2T5 

Spaniards. Hernandez also availed himself of a collection of 
medicinal plants which he found still growing in the cele- 
brated old Mexican garden of Huaxtepec, which, owing to 
its vicinity to a newly-established Spanish hospital,* the Con- 
quistadores had not laid waste. Almost at this time the fos- 
su mastodon bones on the elevated plateaux of Mexico, New 
Granada, and Peru, which have since become so important 
with respect to the theory of the successive elevation of mount- 
ain chains, were collected and described. The designations 
of giant bones and fields of giants ( Campos de Gigantes) suf- 
ficiently testified the fantastic character of the early interpre- 
tation applied to these fossils. 

One circumstance which specially contributed to the exten- 
sion of cosmical views at this enterprising period was the im- 
mediate contact of a numerous mass of Europeans with the 
free and grand exotic forms of nature, on the plains and 
mountainous regions of America, and (in consequence of the 
voyage of Vasco de Gama) on the . eastern shores of Africa 
and Southern India. Even in the beginning of the sixteenth 
century, a Portuguese physician, Garcia de Orta, under the 
protection of the noble Martin Alfonso de Sousa, established, 
on the present site of Bombay, a botanical garden, in which 
he cultivated the medicinal plants of the neighborhood. The 
muse of Camoens has paid Garcia de Orta the tribute of pa- 
triotic praise. The impulse to direct observation was now 
every where awakened, while the cosmographical writings of 

reigned from 1464 to 1477. The learned native historian, Fernando 
de Alva Jxtlilxochitl, whose manuscript chronicle of the Chichimeque 
I saw in 1803, in the place of the Viceroy of Mexico, and of which Mr. 
Prescott has so ably availed himself in his work {Conquest of Mexico, 
vol. i., p. 61, 173, and 206; vol. iii., p. 112), was a descendant of the 
poet king Nezahualcoyotl. The Aztec name of the historian, Fernando 
de Alva, means Vanilla face. M. Ternaux Con^pans, in 1840, caused a 
French translation of this manuscript to be printed in Paris. The notice 
of the long elephants' hair collected by Cadamosto occurs in Ramusio, 
vol. i., p. 109, and in Grynaeus, cap. 43, p. 33. 

* Clavigero, Storia aniica del Messico (Cesena, 1780), t. ii.,p. 153. 
There is no doubt, from the accordant testimonies of Hernan Cortez in 
his reports to the Emperor Charles V., of Bernal Diaz, Gomara, Oviedo, 
and Hernandez, that, at the time of the conquest of Montezuma's em- 
pire, there were no menageries and botanic gardens in any part of 
Europe which could be compared with those of Huaxtepec, Chapolta- 
pec, Iztapalapan, Qnd Tezcuco. (Prescott, op. cit., vol. i., p. 178; vol. 
ii., p. ^6 and 117-121 ; vol. iii., p. 42.) On the early attention which 
is mentioned in the text as having been paid to the fossil bones in the 
••fields of giants," see Garcilaso, lib. ix., cap. 9; Acosta, lib. iv., cap. 
3C and Hernandez (ed. of 1.5.56), t i., cap. 32, p. 10.5. 



276 COSMOS 

the Middle Ages were to be regarded iess as the result of act- 
ual observation than as mere compilations, reflecting the opin- 
ions of classical antiquity. Two of the greatest men of the 
sixteenth century, Conrad Gesner and Andreas Csesalpinus, 
have the high merit of having opened a new path to zoology 
and botany. 

In order to give a more vivid idea of the early influence 
exercised by oceanic discoveries on the enlarged sphere of the 
physical and astronomical sciences connected with navigation, 
I will call attention, at the close of this description, to some lu- 
minous points, which we may already see glimmering through 
the writings of Columbus. Their first faint light deserves to 
be traced with so much the more care, because they contain 
the germs of general cosmical views. I will not pause here 
to consider the proofs of the results which I have enumerated, 
since I have given them in detail in another work, entitled 
Eocamen Critique de VHistoire de la Geographie du Nou- 
veau Continent et des JProgres de VAstronomie Nautique 
aux XV® et xvi^ Siecles. But, in order to avoid the imputa- 
tion of undervaluing the views of modern physical knowledge, 
in comparison with the observations of Columbus, I will give 
the literal translation of a few lines contained in a letter which 
the admiral wrote from Haiti in the month of October, 1498 
He writes as follows : " Each time that I sail from Spain to 
India, as soon as I have proceeded about a hundred nautical 
miles to the west of the Azores, I perceive an extraordinary 
alteration in the movement of the heavenly bodies, in the tem- 
perature of the air, and in the character of the sea. I have 
observed these alterations with especial care, and I notice that 
the mariner's compass (agujas de marear), whose declination 
had hitherto been northeast, was now changed to northwest ; 
and when I had crossed this line (raya), as if in passing the 
brow of a hill {como quien traspone una cuesta), 1 found the 
ocean covered by such a mass of sea weed, similar to small 
branches of pine covered with pistachio nuts, that we were 
apprehensive that, for want of a sufficiency of water, our ships 
would run upon a shoal. Before we reached the line of which 
I speak, there was no trace of any such sea weed. On the 
boundary line, one hundred miles west of the Azores, the ocean 
becomes at once still and calm, being scare, V ever moved by 
a breeze. On my passage from the Canary Islands to the 
parallel of Sierra Leone, we had to endure a frightful degree 
of heat, but, as soon as we had crossed the above-mentioned 
line (to the west of the meridian of the Azores), the climate 



tCEAXIC DISCOVERIES. 2T7 

changed, the air became temperate, aid the freshness increas* 
ed the further we advanced." 

This passage, which is elucidated by many others in the 
writings of Columbus, contains views of physical geography, 
observations on the influence of geographical longitude on the 
declination of the magnetic needle, on the inflection of the iso- 
thermal lines between the western shores of the Old and the 
eastern shores of the New Continent, on the position of the 
Great Saraggssa bank in the basin of the Atlantic Ocean, and 
on the relations existing between this part of the ocean and 
the superimposed atmosphere. Erroneous observations made 
in the vicinity of the Azores, on the movement of the polar 
star,* had misled Columbus during his first voyage, from the 
inaccuracy of his mathematical knowledge, to entertain a be- 
lief in the irregularity of the spheroidal form of the earth. In 
the western hemisphere, the earth, according to his views, ** is 
more swollen, so that ships gradually arrive nearer the heav- 
ens on reaching the line (raya), where the magnetic needle 
points due north, and this elevation (cuesta) is the cause of 
the cooler temperature." The solemn reception of the admi- 
ral in Barcelona took place in April, 1493, and as early as the 
4th of May of the same year, the celebrated bull was signed 
by Pope Alexander VI., which " establishes to all eternity" 
the line of deraarkationt between the Spanish and Portuguese 

* Obsei-vations de Christophe Colomb sur le Passage de la Polaire par 
le M6ridien, in my Relation Hist., t. i., p. 506, and in the Examen Crit., 
t. iii., p. 17-20, 44-.51, and 56-61. (Compare, also, Navarrete, in Co- 
lumbus's Journal of 16th to 30lh of September, 1492, p. 9, 15, and 254.) 

t On the singular differences of the '* Bula de concesion d los Reyes 
CatoHcos de las Indias descubiertas y que se descubieren" of May 3, 
1493, and the *' Bula de Alexandro VI., sobre la particion del oceano" 
of May 4, 1493 (elucidated in the Bula de estension of the 25th of Sep- 
tember, 1493), see Examen Crit., I. iii., p. 52-54. Very different from 
this line of demarkation is that settled in the " Capitulacion de la par- 
ticion del Mar Oceano entre los Reyes Catolicos y Don Juan, Rey de 
Portugal," of the 7th of June, 1494, 370 leagues (17i to an equatorial de- 
gree) west of the Cape Verd Islands. (Compare Navarrete, Coleccion 
de los Viages y Descub. de los Esp., t. ii., p. 28-35, 116-143, and 404 ; t. 
iv., p. 55 and 252.) This last-named line, which led to the sale of the 
Moluccas (de el Moluca) to Portugal, 1529, for the sum of 350,000 gold 
ducats, did not stand in any connection with magnetical or meteorolog 
ical fancies. The papal Hues of demarkation deserve, however, more 
careful consideration in the present work, because, as I have mention- 
ed in the text, they exercised great influence on the endeavors to im- 
prove nautical astronomy, and especially on the methods attempted for 
the determination of the longitude. It is also very deserving of notice, 
that the capitulacion of June 7, 1494, affords the first example of a pro- 
posal for the establishment of a meridian in a permanent manner b^ 



278 COSMOS. 

possess! :)ns, at a, distance of one hundred miles to the west of 
the Azores. If we consider further that Columbus, imme- 
diately after liis return from his first voyage of discovery, pro- 
posed to go to Rome, in order, as he said, to " give the pope 
notice of all that he had discovered," and if the importance 
attached by the cotemporaries of Columbus to the discovery 
of the line of no variation be further borne in mind, it will be 
admitted that I was justified in advancing the historical prop- 
osition that the admiral, at the moment of his .highest court 
favor, strove to have a '^physical line of demarkation con- 
verted into a political one'' 

The influence which the discovery of America and the 
oceanic enterprises connected with that event so rapidly ex- 
ercised on the combined mass of physical and astronomical 
science, is rendered most strikingly manifest when we recall 
the earliest impressions of those who lived at this period, and 
the extended range of those scientific eflbrts, of which the 
more important are comprehended in the first half of the six- 
teenth century. Christopher Columbus has not only the mer- 
it of being the first to discover a line without magnetic va 
riation, but also of having excited a taste for the study of 
terrestrial magnetism in Europe, by means of his observations 
on the progressive increase of western declination in receding 
from that line. The fact that almost every where the ends 
of a freely-moving magnetic needle do not point exactly to 
the geographical north and south poles, must have repeatedly 
been recognized, even with very imperfect instruments, in the 
Mediterranean, and at all places where, in the twelfth centu- 
ry, the declination amounted to more than eight or ten de- 
grees. But it is not improbable that the Arabs or the Cru- 
saders, who were brought in contact with the East between 
the years 1096 and 1270, might, while they spread the use 
of the Chinese and Indian mariner's compass, also have drawn 
attention to the northeast and northwest pointing of the mag- 
netic needle in difierent regions of the earth as to a long- 
known phenomenon. We learn positively from the Chinese 
Fenthsaoyan, which was written under the dynasty of Song,* 

marks graven in rocks, or by the erection of towers. It is commanded, 
" que se haga alguna senal 6 torre," that some signal or tower be erect- 
ed wherever the dividing meridian, whether in the eastern or the west- 
ern hemisphere, intersects an island or a continent in its course from 
pole to pole. In the continents, the rayas were to he marked at prop- 
er intervals by a series of such marks or towers, which would indeed 
have been no slight undertaking. 
* It appears to be a remarkable fact, that the earliest classical writer 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 279 

between 1111 and 1117, that the mode of measuring the 
amount of" western dechnation had long been understood. The 
merit due to Columbus is not to have made the first observa- 
tion of the existence of magnetic variation, since we find, for 
example, that this is set down on the chart of Andrea Bianco 
m 1436, but that he was the first who remarked, on the 13th 
of September, 1492, that " 2i° east of the island of Corvo the 
magnetic variation changed and passed from N.E. to N.W." 
Tkis discovery of a magnetic line without variation marks 
a memorable epoch in nautical astronomy. It was celebrated 
with just praise by Oviedo, Las Casas, and Herrera. We 
can not assume, with Livio Sanuto, that this discovery is due 
to the celebrated navigator, Sebastian Cabot, without entirely 
losing sight of the fact that Cabot's first voyage, made at the 
expense of some merchants of Bristol, and distinguished for its 
success in reaching the continent of America, was not accom- 
plished until five years after the first expedition of Columbus. 
The great Spanish navigator has not only the merit of having 
discovered a region in the Atlantic Ocean where at that period 
the magnetic meridian coincided with the geographical, but 
also that of having made the ingenious observation that mag- 
netic variation might likewise serve to determine the ship's 
place with respect to longitude. In the journal of the second 
voyage (April, 1496) we find that the admiral actually de- 
termined his position by the observed declination. The diffi- 
culties were, it is true, at that period still unknown, which 
oppose this method of determining longitude, especially where 
the magnetic lines of declination are so much curved as to 
follow the parallels of latitude for considerable distances, in 
stead of coinciding with the direction of the meridian. Mag- 
on terrestrial magnetism, William Gilbert, who can not be supposed to 
have had the slightest knowledge of Chinese literature, should regard 
the mariner's compass as a Chinese invention, which had been brought 
to Europe by Marco Polo. " Ilia quidem pyxide nihil unquam humanis 
excogitatum artibus humane generi profuisse magis, constat. Scientia 
nautica) pyxidulae traducta videtur in Italiam per Paulum Venetum, qui 
circa annum mcclx. apud Chinas artem pyxidis didicit." {Gulielmi 
Gilberti Colcestrensis, Medici Londinensis de Magnete Pkysiologia nova, 
Lond., 1600, p. 4.) The idea of the introduction of the compass by 
Marco Polo, whose travels occurred in the interval between 1271 and 
1295, and who therefore returned to Italy after the mariner's compass 
had been mentioned as a long-known instrument by Guyot de Provins 
in his poem, as well as by Jacques de Vitry and Dante, is not 8U|&gt;- 
ported by any evidence. Before Marco Polo set out on his travels in 
the middle of the thirteenth century, Catalans and Basques already 
made use of the compass. (See Raymond Lully, in the Treatise D« 
Coni^mplatione, written in 1272.) 



tSO COSMOS. 

netic and astronomical methods were anxiously sougTit, in ordei 
to determine, on land and at sea, those points which are inter- 
sected by the ideal line of demarkation. The imperfect con- 
dition of science, and of all the instruments used at sea in 1493 
to measure space and time, were unequal to afibrd a practical 
solution to so difficult a problem. Under these circumstances, 
Pope Alexander VI. actually rendered, without knowing it, 
an essential service to nautical astronomy and the physical 
science of terrestrial magnetism by his presumption in dividing 
half the globe between two powerful states. From that time 
forth the maritime powers were continually beset by a host 
of impracticable proposals. Sebastian Cabot, as we learn from 
his friend, Richard Eden, boasted on his death-bed of having 
had a " divine revelation made to him of an infalHble meth- 
od of finding geographical longitude." This revelation con- 
sisted in a firm conviction that magnetic declination changed 
regularly and rapidly with the meridian. The cosmographer 
Alonso de Santa Cruz, one of the instructors of Charles V., un- 
dertook, although certainly from very imperfect observations, 
to draw up the first general variation chart* in the year 1530 
and, therefore, one hundred and fifty years before Halley. 

The advance or movement of the magnetic lines, the knowl- 
edge of which has generally been ascribed to Gassendi, was 
not even conjectured by William Gilbert, although Acosta, 
" from the instruction of Portuguese navigators," had at a 
much earlier period assumed that there were four lines with- 
out declination over the earth's surface.t No sooner was the 

* In corroboration of this statement regarding Sebastian Cabot on his 
death-bed, see the well-written and critically-historical work by Biddle, 
entitled A Memoir of Sebastian Cabo (p. 222). " We do not know 
with certainty," says Biddle, " either the year of the death or the 
burying-place of the great navigator who gave to Great Britain almost 
an entire continent, and without whom (as without Sir Walter Raleigh) 
the English language would perhaps not have been spoken by many 
millions who now inhabit America." On the materials according to 
which the variation chart of Alonso de Santa Cruz was compiled, as 
well as on the variation compass, whose construction allowed altitudes 
of the sun to be taken at the same time, see Navarrete, Noticia biogra- 
Jica del cosmografo Alonso de Santa Cruz, p. 3-8. The first variation 
compass was constructed before 1525, by an ingenious apothecary of 
Seville, Felipe Guillen. The endeavors to learn more exactly the di- 
rection of the curves of magnetic declination were so earnest, that in 
1585 Juan Jayme sailed with Francisco Gali from Manilla to Acapulco 
merely for the purpose of trying in the Pacific a declination instrument 
which he had invente d. See my Essai Politique sur la No^velle Ea- 
pagne, t. iv., p. 110. 

t Acosta, Hist. Natural de las Indias, Ub. i., cap. n These four 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 281 

dipping-needle invented in England, in 1576, by Robert Nor 
man, than Gilbert boasted that, by means of this instrument, 
Ae could determine a ship's place in dark, starless nights (aere 
calignoso)* Immediately after my return to Europe, I show- 
ed from my own observations in the Pacific that, under cer- 
tain local relations, as, for instance, during the season of the 
constant mist (garua) on the coasts of Peru, the latitude might 
be determined from the magnetic inclination with sufficient 
accuracy for the purposes of navigation. I have purposely 
dwelt at length on these individual points, in order to show, 
in our consideration of an important cosmical event, that, with 
the exception of measuring the intensity of magnetic force, and 
the horary variations of the declination, all those questions 
were broached in the sixteenth century, with which the phys- 
icists of the present day are still occupied. On the remarka- 
ble chart of America appended to the edition of the geography 
of Ptolemy, published at Rome in 1508, we find the magnet- 
ic pole marked as an insular mountain north of Gruentlant 
(Greenland), which is represented as a part of Asia. Martin 
Cortez in the Breve Comj^endio de la Sphera (1545), and 
Livio Sanuto in the Geographia di Tolomeo (1588), place it 
further to the south. The latter writer entertained a preju- 
dice, which has unfortunately survived to the present time, 
that " if we were so fortunate as to reach the magnetic pole 
{il calamitico), we should there experience some miraculous 
effects {alcun miraculoso stupendo effettd"). 

Attention was directed at the close of the fifteenth and the 
beginning of the sixteenth century, in reference to the distribu 
tion of heat and meteorology, to the decrease of heat with the 
increase of western longitudet (the curvature of the isothermal 
lines) ; to the law of rotation of the winds, generalized by Lord 

magnetic lines without variation led Halley, by the contests between 
Henry Bond and Beckborrow, to the theory of four magnetic poles. 

* Gilbert, De Magnete Physiologia nova, lib. v., cap. 8, p. 200. 

t In the temperate and cold zones, this inflection of the isothermal 
lines is general between the west coast of Europe and the east coast of 
North America, but within the tropical zone the isothermal lines run 
almost parallel to the equator ; and in the hasty conclusions into which 
Columbus was led, no account was taken of the difference between sea 
and land climates, or between east and west coasts, or of the influence 
of latitudes and winds, as, for instance, those blowing over Africa. 
(Compare the remarkable considerations on climates which are brought 
together in the Vida del Almirante, cap. QQ.) The early conjecture of 
Columbus regarding the curvature of the isothermal lines in the Atlan- 
tic Ocean was well founded, if limited to the extra-tropical (temperate 
and cold) zones. 



tS2 COSMOS. 

Bacon ;* to the decrease of humidity in the atmosphere, and 
of the quantity of rain owing to the destruction of forests ;t 
to the decrease of heat with the increase of elevation above 
the level of the sea ; and to the lower limit of the line of per- 
petual snow. The fact of this limit being a function of 
geographical latitude was first recognized by Peter Martyr 
Anghierain 1510. Alonso de Hojeda and Amerigo Vespucci 
had seen the snowy mountains of Santa Marta (Tierras 
^levadas de Citarma) as early as the year 1500 ; Rodrigo 
Bastidas and Juan de la Cosa examined them more closely in 
1501 ; but it was not until the pilot Juan Vespucci, nephew 
of Amerigo, had communicated to his friend and patron An- 
ghiera an account of the expedition of Colmenares, that the 
tropical snow region visible on the mountainous shore of the 
Caribbean Sea acquired a great, and, we might say, a cosmical 
importance. A connection was now established between the 
lower limit of perpetual snow and the general relations of the 
decrease of heat and the differences of climate. Herodotus 
(ii., 22), in his investigations on the rising of the Nile, wholly 
denied the existence of snowy mountains south of the tropic 
of Cancer. Alexander's campaigns indeed led the Greeks to 
the Nevados of the Hindoo-Coosh range [opr] ay avvKfya), hat 
this is situated between 34° and 36° north latitude. The 
only notice of snow in the equatorial region with which I am 
acquainted, before the discovery of America, and prior to the 
year 1500, and which has been but little regarded by physi- 
cists, is contained in the celebrated inscription of Adulis, which 
is considered by Niebuhr to be later than Juba and Augustus. 
The knowledge of the dependence of the lower limit of snow 
on the latitude of the place, $ the first insight into the law of 
the vertical decrease of temperature, and the sinking of an 

* An observation of Columbus. ( Vida del Almirante, cap. 55 ; Ex- 
amen CriL, t. iv., p. 253 ; and see, also, vol. i., p. 316.) 

t The admiral, says Fernando Colon {Vida del ^/»j.,cap. 58), ascrib- 
ed the extent and denseness of the forests which clothed the ridges of 
the mountains to the many refreshing falls of rain, which cooled the air 
while he continued to sail along the coast of Jamaica. He remarks in 
his ship's journal on this occasion, that " formerly the quantity of rain 
was equally great in Madeira, the Canaries, and the Azores ; but since 
the trees which shaded the ground have been cut dow^n, rain has be- 
come much more rare." This warning has remained almost unheeded 
for three centuries and a half. 

X See vol. i., p. J29 ; Examen Crit., t. iv., p. 294 ; Aste Centrale, t. 
iii., p. 235. The inscription of Adulis, which is almost fifteen hundred 
years older than Anghiera, speaks of " Abyssinian snow, in which the 
ti'aveler sinks up to the knees." 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 283 

almost equally cold upper stratum of air from the equatoi 
toward the poles, designate an important epoch in the history 
Df our physical knowledge. 

If, on the one hand, accidental observations, having a 
wholly unscientific origin, favored this knowledge in the sud- 
denly enlarged spheres of natural investigation, the age we 
are describing was, on the other hand, from an unfortunate 
combination of circumstances, singularly deficient in the ad- 
vantages arising from a purely scientific impulse. Leonardo 
da Vinci, the greatest physicist of the fifteenth century, who 
combined an enviable insight into nature with distinguished 
mathematical knowledge, was the cotemporary of Columbus, 
and died three years after him. Meteorology, as well as hy- 
draulics and optics, had occupied the attention of this cele* 
brated artist. The influence which he exercised during his 
life was made manifest by his great works in painting, and 
by the eloquence of his discourse, and not by his writings. 
Had the physical views of Leonardo da Vinci not remained 
buried in his manuscripts, the field of observation opened by 
the new world would in a great degree have been worked out 
in many departments of science before the great epoch of Gal- 
ileo, Pascal, and Huygens. Like Francis Bacon, and a whole 
century before him, he regarded induction as the only sure 
method of treating natural science (" dobbiamo cominciare 
dalV esperienza, eper mezzo di questa scopirne la regio7ie'')* 

As we find, notwithstanding the want of instruments of 
\iieasurement, that the questions of climatic relations in the 
tropical mountainous regions — the distribution of heat, the 
extremes of atmospheric dryness, and the frequency of electric 
explosions — were frequently discussed in the accounts of the 
first land journeys, so also it appears that mariners very early 
acquired correct views of the direction and rapidity of the cur- 
rents which traverse the Atlantic Ocean, like rivers of very 
variable breadth. The actual equatorial current, the move- 
ment of the waters between the tropics, was first described by 
Columbus. He expresses himself most positively and gener- 

* Leonardo da Vinci correctly observes of this proceeding, " questo 
6 il methodo daosservarsi nella ricerca de' fenomeni della natura." 
See Veiituri, Essai surles Ouvrages Physico-mathematiques de Leonardo 
da Vinci, 1797, p. 31 ; Amoretti, Memorie Storiche sit la Vila di Lionav 
do da Vinci, Milano, 1804, p. 143 (in his edition of Trattalo della PiUw 
ra, t. xxxiii. of the Classici Italiani) ; Whewell, Philos. of the Inductive 
Sciences, 1840, vol. ii., p. 368-370; Brewster, Life of Newton, p. 332, 
Most of Leonardo da Vinci's physical works bear the date of the yea* 
1408. 



284 COSMOS. 

ally on the subject on his third voyage, saying, '* the watera 
Miove with the heavens {con los cielos) from east to west." 
Even the direction of separate floating masses of sea weed 
confirmed this view.* A small pan of tinned iron, which he 
found in the hands of the natives of the island of Guadaloupe, 
confirmed Columbus in the idea that it might be of European 
origin and obtained from the remains of a shipwrecked vessel, 
borne by the equatorial current from Spain to the coasts of 
America. In hi* geognostic fancies, he regarded the exist- 
ence of the series of the smaller Antilles and the peculiar con- 
figuration of the larger islands, or, in other words, the corre- 
spondence in the direction of their coasts with that of their 
parallels of latitude, as the long-continued action of the move 
ment of the sea between the tropics from east to west. 

When the admiral, on his ^ourth and last voyage, discov 
ered the inclination from north to south of the coasts of the 
continent from Cape Gracias a Dies to the Laguna de Chiri- 
qui, he felt the action of the violent current which runs N. 
and N.N. W., and is induced by the contact of the equatorial 
current with the opposite dike-like projecting coast-line. An- 

* The great attention paid by the early navigators to natural phe 
nomena may be seen in the oldest Spanish accounts. Diego de Lepe, 
tor instance, found, in 1499 (as we learn from a witness in the lawsuit 
against the heirs of Columbus), by means of a vessel having valves, 
which did not open until it had reached the bottom, that at a distance 
from the mouth of the Orinoco, a stratum of fresh water of six fathoms 
depth flowed above the salt water (Navarrete, Viages y Descubrim., t. 
iii., p. 549). Columbus drew milk-white sea water (" white as if meal 
bad been mixed with it") on the south coast of Cuba, and carried it 
to Spain in bottles ( Vida del Almirante, p. 56). I have myself been at 
the same spots for the purpose of determining longitudes, and it surpris- 
ed me to think that the milk-white color of sea water, so common on 
shoals, should have been regarded by the experienced admiral as a new 
and unexpected phenomenon. With reference to the Gulf Stream it 
self, which must be regarded as an important cosmical phenomenon, 
many efiects had been observed long before the discovery of Ameiica, 
produced by the sea washing on shore at the Canaries and the Azores 
stems of bamboos, trunks of pines, corpses of strange aspect from the 
Antilles, and even living men in canoes." which could never sink." 
These effects were, however, then attributed solely to the strength of 
the westerly gales ( Vida del Almirante, cap. 8 ; Herrera, Dec. i., lib. 
i., cap. 2; lib. ix., cap. 12), while the movement of the waters, which 
is wholly independent of the direction of the winds — the returning 
stream of the oceanic current, which brings every year tropical fruits 
from the West Indian Islands to the coasts of Ireland and Norway, waa 
not accurately recognized. Compare the memoir of Sir Humphrey 
Gilbert, On the Possibility of a Northwest Passage to Cathay, in Hak- 
luyt, Navigations and Voyages, vol. iii., p. 14 ; Herrera, Dec. i., lib. ix. 
cap. 12 ; and Examen Crit, t. ii., p. 247-257 ; t, iii., p. 99-108 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 285 

ghiera survived Columbus sufficiently long to become acquaint- 
ed with the deflection of the waters of the Atlantic through- 
out their whole course, and to recognize the existence of the 
rotatory movement in the Mexican Gulf, and the propagation 
of this movement to the Tierra de los Bacallaos (Newfound- 
land) and the mouth of the St. Lawrence. I have elsewhere 
circumstantially considered how much the expedition of Fonce 
de Leon, in the year 1512, contributed to the establishment 
of more exact ideas, and have shown that in a treatise writ- 
ten by Sir Humphrey Gilbert between the years 1567 and 
157G, the movement of the waters of the Atlantic Ocean from 
the Cape of Good Hope to the Banks of Newfoundland is 
treated according to views which coincide almost entirely with 
those of my excellent deceased friend, Major Rennell. 

At the same time that the knowledge of oceanic currents 
was generally diffused, men also became acquainted with those 
great banks of sea weed {Fuciis nutans) — the oceanic mead- 
ows which presented the singular spectacle of the accumula- 
tion of a social plant over an extent of space almost snven times 
greater than the area of France. The great Fucus Barik, the 
Marde Sargasso, extends between 19° and 34° north latitude. 
The major axis is situated about 7° west of the island of Cor- 
vo. The lesser Fucus Bank lies in the space between the 
Bermudas and the Bahamas. Winds and partial currents 
variously aflect, according to the character of the season, the 
length and circumference of these Atlantic fucoid meadows, 
for the first description of which we are indebted to Columbus. 
No other sea in either hemisphere presents an accumulation 
of social plants on so large a scale. "^ 

The important era of geographical discoveries and of the 
sudden opening of an unknown hemisphere not only extended 
our knowledge of the earth, but it also expanded our views of 
the whole universe, or, in other words, of the visible vault of 
heaven. Smce man, to borrow a fine expression of Garcilaso 
de la Vega, in his wanderings to distant regions sees " lands 
and stars simultaneously change,"t the advance to the equa- 
tor on both coasts of Africa, and even beyond the southern 
extremity of the New Continent, must have presented to trav- 
elers, by sea and land, the glorious aspect of the southern con- 
stellations longer and more frequently than could have been 

* Examen Crit., t. iii., p. 26 and 66-99 ; and see, also, Cosmos, vol. 
i., p. 308. 

t Alonso de Ercilla has imitated the passage of Garcilaso in the Arau 
can^ ; " Climas passo made coustelaciones." — See Cosmos, ante, p. 72. 



286 COSMOS. 

the case at the time of Hiram and the Ptolemies, or during 
the Roman dominion, and the period in which the Arabs 
maintained commercial intercourse with the nations dwelling 
on the shores of the Red Sea or of the Indian Ocean, between 
the Straits of Bab-el-Mandeb and the western peninsula of 
India. Amerigo Vespucci, in his letters, Vicente Yariez Piu- 
zon, Pigafetta, the companion of Magellan and Elcano, and 
Andrea Corsali, in his voyage to Cochin in the East Indies, 
in the beginning of the sixteenth century, gave the first and 
most animated accounts of the southern sky (beyond the feet 
of the Centaur and the glorious constellation Argo). Amer- 
igo, who had higher literary acquirements, and whose style 
was also more redundant than that of the others, extols, not 
ungracefully, the glowing richness of the light, and the pic- 
turesque grouping and strange aspect of the constellations that 
circle round the southern pole, which is surrounded by so few 
stars. He maintains, in his letters to Pierfrancesco de' Med- 
ici, that he had carefully devoted his attention, on his third 
voyage, to the southern constellations, having made drawings 
of them and measured their polar distances. His communi- 
cations regarding these observations do not, indeed, leave 
much cause to regret that any portion of them should havt- 
been lost. 

I find that the first mention of the mysterious black specks 
(coal-bags) was made by Anghiera in the year 1510. They 
had already been observed in 1499 by the companions of Vi- 
cente Yaiiez Pinzon, on the expedition dispatched from Palos, 
and wluch took possession of the Brazilian Cape San Augus- 
tin.* The Canopo fosco ( Canopus niger) of Amerigo is prob- 
ably also one of these coal-bags. The intelligent Acosta com- 
pares them to the darkened portion of the moon's disk (in par- 
tial eclipses), and appears to ascribe them to a void in the 
heavens, or to an absence of stars. Rigaud has shown how 
the reference to the coal-bags, of which Acosta says positively 
that they are visible in Peru (and not in Europe), and move 
round the south pole, has been regarded by a celebrated as- 
tronomer as the first notice of spots on the sun.f The knowl- 
edge of the two Magellanic clouds has been unjustly ascribed 
to Pigafetta, for I find that Anghiera, on the observations of 
Portuguese seamen, mentions these clouds fully eight years 

* Petr. Mart., Ocean., Dec. i., lib. ix., p. 9Q ; Examen Crit., t. iv., p. 
221 and 317. 

t Acosta, Hist. Natural de las Indias, lib. i., cap. 3 ; Rigaud, Account 
ef Harriot's Astron. Papers, 1833, p. 37. 



OCEAN C DISCOVERIES- 287 

befors the termination of Magellan's voyage of circumnaviga- 
tion. He compares their mild effulgence to that of the Milky 
Way. The larger cloud did not, however, escape the vigilance 
of the Arabs, and it is probably the vi^hite ox {El Bakar) of 
their southern sky, the ivhite spot of which the astronomer 
Abdurrahman Sofi says that it could not be seen at Bagdad 
or in northern Arabia, but at Tehama, and in the parallel of 
the Straits of Bab-el-Mandeb. The Greeks and Romans, 
who followed the same path under the Lagides and later, did 
not observe, or, at least, make no mention, in their extant 
writings, of a cloud of light, which, nevertheless, between 11^ 
and 12^ north latitude, rose three degrees above the horizon 
at the time of Ptolemy, and more than four degrees in that of 
Abdurrahman, in the' year 1000."^ At the present day, the 
altitude of the central part of the Nubecula major may be 
about 5^ at Aden. The reason that seamen usually first see 
the Magellanic clouds in much more southern latitudes, as, 
for instance, near the equator, or even far to the south of it, 
is probably to be ascribed to the character of the atmosphere, 
and to the vapors near the horizon, which reflect white light. 
In Southern Arabia, especially in the interior of the country, 
the deep azure of the sky and the great dryness of the atmos- 
phere must favor the recognition of the Magellanic clouds, as 
we see exemplified by the visibility of comets' tails at daylight 
between the tropics and in very southern latitudes. 

The arrangement of the stars near the antarctic pole into 
new constellations was made in the seventeenth century. The 
observations made with imperfect instruments by the Dutch 
navigators Petrus Theodori of Embden, and Friedrich Hout- 
mann, who was a prisoner in Java and Sumatra to the King 
of Bantam and Atschin (1596-1599), were incorporated in 
the celestial charts of Hondius Bleaw ( Jansonius Cassius) and 
Bayer. 

* Pigafetta, Primo Viaggio intorno al Olobo Terracqueo, publ. da C- 
AmoreUi, 1800, p. 46 ; Ramusio, vol. i., p. 355, c. ; Petr. Mart., Ocean., 
Dec. iii, lib. i., p. 217. (According to the events referred to by An- 
ghiera, Dec. ii., lib. x, p. 204, and Dec. iii., lib. x., p. 232, the passage 
in the Oceanica which speaks of the Magellanic clouds must have been 
written between 1514 and 1516.) Andrea Corsali {Ramusio, vol. i., 
p. 177) also describes, in a letter to Giuliano de' Medici, the rotatory 
and translatoiy movement of " due nvgolette di ragionevol grandezza.' 
The star which he repiesents between Nubecula major and minor ap 
pears to me to be^ Hydrae (Examen Crit., t. v., p. 234-233). Regard 
ing Petrus Theodori of Embden, and Houtmann, the pupil of the math 
ematician Plancius, see an historical article by Olbers, in Schumacher'* 
Jahriueh fUr 1840» 8. 249 



288 COSMOS. 

The less regu]ar distribution of masses of li^ht gives to the 
zone of the southern sky situated between the parallels of 50° 
and 80'', which is so rich in crowded nebulous spots and starry 
masses, a peculiar, and, one might almost say, picturesque 
character, depending on the grouping of the stars of the first 
and second magnitudes, and their separation by intervals, 
which appear to the naked eye desert and devoid of radiance: 
These singular contrasts — the Milky Way, which presents nu- 
merous portions more brilliantly illumined than the rest, and 
the insulated, revolving, rounded Magellanic clouds, and the 
coal-bags, the larger of which lies close upon a beautiful con- 
stellation — all contribute to augment the diversity of the pic- 
ture of nature, and rivet the attention of the susceptible mind 
to separate regions on the confines of th'fe southern sky. One 
of these, the constellation of the Southern Cross, has acquired 
a peculiar character of importance from the beginning of the 
sixteenth century, owing to the religious feelings of Christian 
navigators and missionaries who have visited the tropical and 
southern seas and both the Indies. The four principal stars 
of which it is composed are mentioned in the Almagest, and, 
therefore, were regarded in the time of Adrian and Antoninus 
Pius as parts of the constellation of the Centaur.* It seems 
singular that, since the figure of this constellation is so strik- 
ing, and is so remarkably well defined and individuahzed, in 
the same way as those of the Greater and Lesser Bear, the 
Scorpion, Cassiopeia, the Eagle, and the Dolphin, these four 
stars of the Southern Cross should not have been earlier sepa- 
rated from the large ancient constellation jof the Centaur ; and 
this is so much the more remarkable, since the Persian Kaz- 
wini, and other Mohammedan astronomers, took pains to dis- 
cover crosses in the Dolphin and the Dragon. Whether the 
courtly fliattery of the Alexandrian literati, who converted 
Canopus into a Ptolemceon, likewise included the stars of our 
Southern Cross, for the glorification of Augustus, in a Ccssaris 
thronon, never visible in Italy, is a question that can not now 
be very readily answered. t At the time of Claudius Ptole- 
mseus, the beautiful star at the base of the Southern Cross 
had still an altitude of 6° 10' at its meridian passage at Alex- 
andria, while in the present day it culminates there several 
degrees below the horizon. In order at this time (1847). to 

• Compare the researches of Delambre and Eucke with Ideler, Ur- 
gprung der Stemnamen, s. xlix., 263 und 277 ; also my Examen Crit.t t. 
iv., p. 319-324; t. v., p. 17-19, 30, and 230-234. 

t Plin., ii., 7&lt; ; Ideler, Stemnamen, s. 260 und 295. 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 289 

eee a Crucis at an altitude of 6° 0', it is necessary, taking 
the refraction into account, to be ten degrees south of Alex- 
andria, in the parallel of 21° 43' north latitude. In the fourth 
century the Christian anchorites in the Thebaid desert might 
have seen the Cross at an altitude of ten degrees. I doubt, 
hawever, whether its designation is due to them, for Dante, 
in the celebrated passage of the Fiirgatorio^ 

lo mi volsi a man destra, e posi mente 

AU'altro polo, e vidi quattro stelle 

Non viste mai fuor ch' alia prima geute ; 

and Amerigo Vespucci, who, at the aspect of the starry skies 
of the south, first called to mind this passage on his third 
voyage, and even boasted that he now " looked on the four 
stars never seen till then by any save the first human pair," 
were both unacquainted with the denomination of the South- 
ern Cross. Amerigo simply observes that the four stars form 
a rhomboidal figure (una mando7'la), and this remark was 
made in the year 1501. The more frequently the maritime 
expeditions on the routes opened by Gama and Magellan round 
the Cape of Good Hope and through the Pacific were mul- 
tiplied, and as Christian missionaries penetrated into the new 
ly-discovered tropical lands of America, the fame of this con 
stellation continually increased. I find it mentioned first by 
the Florentine, Andrea Corsali, in 1517, and subsequently, in 
1520, byPigafetta, as a wonderful cross {croce Qnaravigliosa), 
more glorious than all the constellations in the heavens. The 
learned Florentine extols Dante's " prophetic spirit," as if the 
great poet had not as much erudition as creative imagination, 
and as if he had not seen Arabian celestial globes, and con- 
versed with many learned Oriental travelers of Pisa.* Acos 

* I have elsewhere attempted to dispel the doubts which several dis 
tinguished commentators of Dante have advanced in modern times re- 
epectiug the " quattro stelle" To take this problem in all its complete- 
ness, we must compare the passage, " lo mi volsi," &amp;c. {Purgat., 1., 
V. 22-24), with the other passages: Purg., 1., v. 37; viii., v. 85-93; 
xxix., v, 121 ; XXX., v. 97 ; xxxi., v. 106; and Inf., xxvi., v. 117 and 
127. The Milanese astronomer, De Cesaris, considers the three "fa- 
celle" (" Di che il polo di qu4 tutto quanto arde," and which set when 
the four stars of the Cross rise) to be Canopus, Achernar, and Fomalhaut. 
I have endeavored to solve these difficulties by the following considera- 
tions. " The philosophical and religious mysticism which penetrates 
and vivifies the grand composition of Dante, assigns to all objects, be- 
sides their real or material existence, an ideal one. It seems almost 
as if we beheld two worlds reflected in one another. The four stars 
represent, in their moral order, the cardiiial virtues, prudence, justice, 
strength, and temperance ; and they, therefore, merit the name of ^o 
Vol. :I ^^N 



290 COSMOS. 

ta, in his Histaria Natural y MotoI de las Indias* lemarks, 
that in the Spanish settlements of tropical America, the first 
settlers were accustomed, even as is now done, to use, as a 
celestial clock, the Southern Cross, calculating the hours from 
its inclined or vertical position. 

In consequence of the precession of the equinoxes the star- 
ry heavens are continually changing their aspect from every 
portion of the earth's surface. The early races of mankind 
beheld in the far north the glorious constellation of our south- 
ern hemisphere rise before them, which, after remaining long 
Invisible, will again appear in those latitudes after the lapse 
of thousands of years. Canopus was fully 1° 20' below the 
horizon at Toledo (39° 54' north latitude) in the time of Co- 
lumbus, and now the same star is almost as much above the 
horizon at Cadiz. While at Berlin and in the northern lati- 
tudes the stars of the Southern Cross, as well as a and /3 Cen- 
tauri, are receding more and more from view, the Magellanic 
clouds are slowly approaching our latitudes. Canopus was 
at its greatest northern approximation during the last century, 
and is now moving nearer and nearer to the south, although 

holy lights, ' luci sante.'' The tliree stars which light the pole repre- 
sent the theological virtues, faith, hope, and charity. The first of these 
being.s themselves reveals their double nature, chanting, ' Here we are 
nymphs, in heaven we are stars ;' Noi sem qui ninfe, e ncl cielo semo 
Btelle. In the land of truth, in the terrestrial paradise there are seven 
nymphs. In cerchio faccran di se clau&amp;tro le setle ninfe. This is the 
union of all the cardinal and theological virtues. Under these mystic 
forms we can scarcely recognize the real objects of the firmament sepa 
rated from each other, according to the eternal laws of the celeatial mech 
anism. The ideal world is a free creation of the soul, the product of 
poetic inspiration." {Examen Crit., t. iv., p. 324-332.) 

* Acosta, lib. i., cap. 5. Compare my Relation Historique, t. i., p. 2(&gt;9. 
A.S the stars a and y of the Southern Cross have almost the same right 
ascension, the Cross appears perpendicular when passing the meridian; 
but the natives too often forget that this celestial clock marks the hour 
each day 3' 56" earlier. I am indebted to the communications of my 
friend. Dr. Galle, by whom Le Verrier's planet was first discovered i» 
the heavens, for all the calculations respecting the visibility of southern 
stars in northern latitudes. " The inaccuracy of the calculation, accord- 
ing to which the star a of the Southern Cross, taking refraction into ac- 
count, would appear to have begun to be invisible in 52*^ 25' north 
latitude, about the year 2900 before the Christian era, may perhaps 
amount to more than 100 years, and could not be altogether set aside, 
even by the strictest mode of calculation, as the proper motion of the 
fixed stars is probably not uniform for such long intervals of time 
The proper motion of a Crucis is about one third of a second annually, 
chiefly in right ascension. It may be presumed that the uncertainty 

E reduced by neglecting this does not exceed the above-meutidnoo 
mit." 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 291 

verj slowly, owing to its vicinity to the south pole of the 
ecliptic. The Southern Cross began to become invisible in 
52° 30' north latitude 2900 years before our era, since, accord- 
ing to Galle, this constellation might previously have reached 
an altitude of more than 10°. When it disappeared from the 
horizon of the countries on the Baltic, the great pyramid of 
Cheops had already been erected more than five hundred years. 
The pastoral tribe of the Hyksos made their incursion seven 
hundred years earlier. The past seems to be visibly nearer 
to us when we connect its measurement with great and mem- 
orable events. 

The progress made in nautical astronomy, that is to say, in 
the improvement of methods of determining the ship's place 
(its geographical latitude and longitude), was simultaneous 
with the extension of a knowledge of the regions of space, al- 
though this knowledge was more the result of sensuous observ- 
ation than of scientific induction. All that was able in the 
course of ages to favor advance in the art of navigation — the 
compass and the more correct acquaintance with magnetic 
declination ; the measurement of a ship's speed by a more 
careful construction of the log, and by the use of chronometers 
and lunar observations ; the improved construction of ships ; 
the substitution of another force for that of the wind ; and 
lastly and most especially, the skillful application of astrono- 
my to the ship's reckoning — must all be regarded as power- 
ful means toward the opening of the different portions of the 
earth, the more rapid and animated furtherance of general in- 
tercourse, and the acquirement of a knowledge of cosmical re- 
lations. Assuming this as one point of view, we would again 
observe, that even in the middle of the thirteenth century, 
nautical instruments capable of determining the time by the 
altitude of the stars were in use among the seamen of Cata- 
lonia and the island of Majorca, and that the astrolabe de- 
scribed by Raymond Lully in his Arte de Navegar was almost 
two hundred years older than that of Martin Behaim. The 
importance of astronomical methods was so thoroughly appre- 
ciated in Portugal, that toward the year 1484 Behaim was 
nominated president of a Junta de Mathematicos, who were 
to form tables of the sun's declination, and, as Barros observes, 
to teach pilots the method of navigating by the sun's altitude, 
maniera de navegar por altura del Sol* This mode of nav 
igating by the meridian altitude of the sun was even at "ihat 

• Barros, Da Asia, Dec. i., liv. iv., cap. 2 (1788), p. 282 



292 COSMOS. 

time clearly distinguished from that by the determination of 
the longitude, for la altura del Este-Oeste.* 

The importance of determining the position of the papa] 
line of demarkation, and of thus fixing the limits between the 
possessions of the Portuguese and Spanish crowns in the new- 
ly-discovered land of Brazil, and in the group of islands in the 
South Indian Ocean, increased, as we have already observed, 
the desire for ascertaining a practical method for determining 
the longitude. Men perceived how rarely the ancient and im- 
perfect method of lunar eclipses employed by Hipparchus could 
be applied, and the use of lunar distances was recommended 
as early as 1514 by the Nuremberg astronomer, Johann Wer- 
ner, and soon afterward by Orontius Finaeus and Gemma 
Frisius. Unfortunately, however, these methods also remain- 
ed impracticable until, after many fruitless attempts with the 
instruments of Peter Apianus (Bienewitz) and Alonso de San- 
ta Cruz, me mirror sextant was invented by the ingenuity of 
Newton in 1700, and was brought into use among seamen by 
Hadley in 1731. 

The influence of the Arabian astronomers acted, through 
the Spaniards, on the general progress of nautical astronomy. 
Many methods were certainly attempted for determining the 
longitude, which did not succeed ; and the fault of the want 
of success was less rarely ascribed to the incorrectness of the 
observation, than to errors of printing in the astronomical 
ephemerides of Regiomontanus which were then in use. The 
Portuguese even suspected the correctness of the astronomical 
data as given by the Spaniards, whose tables they accused of 
being falsitied from political grounds.! The suddenly-awak- 
ened desire for the auxiliaries which nautical astronomy prom- 
ised, at any rate theoretically, is moBt vividly expressed in the 
narrations of the travels of Columbus, Amerigo Vespucci, Piga- 
fetta, and of Andreas de San Martin, the celebrated pilot of 
the Magellanic expedition, who was in possession of the meth- 
ods of Ruy Falero for determining the longitude. Oppositions 
of planets, occultations of the stars, difierences of altitude be- 
tween the moon and Jupiter, and changes in the moon's dec- 
lination, were all tried with more or less success. We pos- 
sess observations of conjunction by Columbus on the night of 
the 13th of January, 1493, at Haiti. The necessity for at* 

* Navarrete, Coleccion de log Viages y Descubrimientos que HicUron 
por mar los Espanoles, t. iv., p. xxxii. (in the Noiicia Biographica a, 
Fer7iando dc Magcllanes). 

t Biirros, ")ec. iii., parte ii., p. 650 and 658-662. 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 293 

taching a special and well-informed astronomer to every great 
expedition was so generally felt, that Queen Isabella wrote to 
Columbus on the 5th of September, 1493, " that although he 
had shown in his undertakings that he knew more than any 
other living being {que ninguno de los nacidos), she counseled 
him. nevertheless, to take with him Fray Antonio de Marche- 
na, as being a learned and skillful astronomer." Columbus 
writes, in the narrative of his fourth voyage, that " there was 
only one infallible method of taking a ship's reckoning, viz., 
that employed by astronomers. He who understands it may 
rest satisfied, for that which it yields is like unto a prophetic 
vision {vision profetica.)* Our ignorant pilots, when they 

* The queen writes to Columbus : " Nosotros mismos y no otro algu 
no, habemos visto algo del libro que nos dejustes,''^ " we ourselves, and 
no one else, have seen the book you have seat us" (a journal of his 
voyage, in which the distrustful navigator had omitted all numerical 
data (yf degrees of latitude and of distances) : •' quanto mas en esto plati- 
camos y vemos, conocemos cuan gran cosa ha seido este negocio vues- 
tro, y que habeis sabido en ello mas que nimca se pens6 que pudiera 
saber ninguno de los nacidos. Nos parece qve seria bien que llevdsedes 
con vos uu buen Estrologo, y nos parescia que seria bueno para esto 
Fray Antonio de Marchena, porque es buen Estrologo, y siempre, nos 
parecio que se conformaba con vuestro parecer." " The more we have 
examined it, the more we have appreciated your undertaking, and the 
more we have felt that you have shown by it that you know more than 
any human being could be supposed to know. It appears to us that it 
would be well for you to take with you some astrologer, and that Fray 
Antonio de Marchena would be a very suitable person for such a pur- 
pose." Respecting this Marchena, who is identical with Fray Juan 
Perez, the guardian of the Convent de la Rabida, where Columbus, in 
his poverty, in 1484, "asked the monks for bread and water for his 
child," see Navarrete, t. ii., p. 110 ; t. iii., p. 597 and 603 (Munoz, Hist. 
del Nnevo Mundo, lib. iv., § 24.) Columbus, in a letter from Jamaica 
to the Christianisimos Monarcas, July 7, 1503, calls the astronomical 
ei)hemerides '■'■una vision profetica.^^ (Navarrete, t. i., p. 306.) The 
Portuguese astronomer, Ruy Falero, a native of Cubilla, nominated by 
Charles V., in 1519, Caballero de la Orden de Santiago, at the samw 
time as Magellan, played an important part in the preparations for Ma« 
gellan's voyage of circumnavigation. He had prepared expressly for 
him a treatise on determinations of longitude, of which the great his- 
torian Barros possessed some chapters in manuscript {Examen Crii., t. 
i., p. 276 and 302 ; t. iv., p. 315), probably the same which were print- 
ed at Seville by John Escomberger in 1535. Navarrete (Obra pdsivma 
$obre la Hist, de la Nautica y de las ciencias Matematicas, 1846, p. 147) 
had not been able to find the book even in Spain. Respecting the four 
methods of determining the longitude which F'alero had received from 
the suggestions of his " Demonio familiar," see Herrera, Dec. ii., lib. 
ii., cap. 19, and Navarrete, t. v., p. Ixxvii. Subsequently the cosmog- 
rapher Alonso de Santa Cruz, the same who (like the apothecary of 
Seville, Felipe Guillen, 1525) attempted to determine the longitude by 
means of the variation of the magnetic needle, made impracticable pro 



294 COSMOS. 

have lost sight of land for several days, know not where they 
are. They would not be able to find the countries again 
which I have discovered. To navigate a ship requires the 
compass {ccmipas y arte), and the knowledge or art of the as- 
tronomer." 

I have given these characteristic details in order more 
clearly to show the manner in which nautical astronomy — the 
powerful instrument for rendering navigation more secure, and 
thereby of facilitating access to all portions of the earth — was 
first developed in the period of time under consideration, and 
how, in the general intellectual activity of the age, men per- 
ceived the possibility of establishing methods which could not 
be made practically applicable until improvements were ef- 
fected in solar and lunar tables, and in the construction of 
time-pieces and instruments for measuring angles. If the 
character of an age be " the manifestation of the human mind 
in any definite epoch," the age of Columbus and of the great 
nautical discoveries must be regarded as having given a new 
and higher impetus to the acquirements of succeeding centu- 
ries, while it increased in an unexpected manner the objects of 
science and contemplation. It is the peculiar attribute of 
important discoveries at once to extend the domain of our pos- 
sessions, and the prospect into the new territories which yet 
remain open to conquest. Weak minds complacently believe 
that in their own age humanity has reached the culminating 
point of intellectual progress, forgetting that by the internal 
connection existing among .all natural phenomena, in propor- 
tion as we advance, the field to be traversed acquires addition- 
al extension, and that it is bounded by a horizon which inces- 
santly recedes before the eyes of the inquirer. 

Where, in the history of nations, can we find an epoch sim- 
ilar to that in which events so fraught with important results 
as the discovery and first colonization of America, the passage 
to the East Indies round the Cape of Good Hope, and Magel- 
lan's first circumnavigation, occurred simultaneously with the 
highest perfection of art, with the attainment of intellectual 

posals for accomplishing the same object by the conveyance of time; 
but his ciironometers were sand-and-water clocks, wheel-works moved 
by weights, and even by wicks " dipped in oil," which were consum- 
ed in very equal intervals of time ! Pigafetta ( Transunto del Trattaio 
di Navigazione, p. 219) recommends altitudes of the moon at the me- 
ridian. Amerigo Vespucci, speaking of the metnod of determining lon- 
gitude by lunar distances, says, with great naivete and truth, that its 
advantages arise from the " corso piu leggier de la luna.^' (Canovai, 
Viaggi, p. 57.) 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 296 

uni reL^ioas freedom, and with the sudden enlargement of 
the Knowledge of the earth and the heavens ? Such an age 
owes a very inconsiderable portion of its greatness to the dis- 
tance at which we contemplate it, or to the circumstance of 
its appearing before us amid the records of history, and free 
from the disturbing reality of the present. But here too, as 
in all earthly things, the brilliancy of greatness is dimmed by 
the association of eruotions of profound sorrow. The advance 
of cosmical knowledge was bought at the price of the violence 
and revolting horrors «vhich conquerors — the so-called civil- 
izers of the earth — spj.-ead around them. But it were irra- 
tional and rashly bold to decide dogmatically on the balance 
of blessings and evils in the interrupted history of the develop- 
ment of mankind. It becomes not man to pronounce judg- 
ment on the great events of the world's history, which, slowly 
developed in the womb of iime, belong but partially to the 
age in which we place them. 

The first discovery of the central and southern portions of 
the United States of America by the Northmen coincides very 
nearly with the mysterious wppearance of Manco Capac in 
the elevated plateaux of Peru, and is almost two hundred years 
prior to the arrival of the Azteks in the Valley of Mexico. 
The foundation of the principal city (Tenochtitlan) occurred 
fully three hundred and twenty-five years later. If these 
Scandinavian colonizations had been attended by permanent 
results, if they had been maintained and protected by a pow- 
erful mother country, the advancing Germanic races would 
fitill have found many unsettled hordes of hunters in those re- 
gions where the Spanish conqueroys met with only peacefuUy- 
Bettled agriculturists.* 

* The American race, which was tl^ same from 65° north latitude 
to 55° south latitude, passed directly from the life of hunters to that of 
cultivators of the soil, without undergoing the intermediate gradation 
of a pastoral life. This circumstance is bo much the more remarkable, 
because the bison, which is met with in enormous herds, is susceptible 
of domestication, and yields an abundan*- supply of milk. Little atten- 
tion has been paid to an account given in Gomara {Hist. Gen. de las 
Indias, cap. 214), according to which it would appear that in the six- 
teenth century there was a race of men living in the northwest of Mex- 
ico, in about 40° north latitude, whose greatest riches consisted in herds 
of tamed bisons {bueyes con una giba). From these animals the natives 
obtained materials for clothing, food, and drink, which was probably 
the blood (Prescott, Conquest of Mexico^ vol, iii., p. 416), for the dis- 
like to milk, or, at least, its non-employment, appears, before the anival 
of Europeans, to have been common to all the natives of the New Con- 
tinent, as well as to the inhabitants of China and Cochin China. There 
were certainly, from the earliest times, herds of domesticated llamas in 



296 COSMOS. 

The age of the Conquista, which ccmprises the eni of the 
fifteenth and the beginning of the sixteenth century, indicates 
a remarkable concurrence of great events in the pohtical and 
social life of the nations of Europe. In the same month in 
which Hernan Cortez, after the battle of Otumba, advanced 
upon Mexico, with the view of besieging it, Martin Luther 
burned the pope's bull at Wittenberg, and laid the foundation 
of the Reformation, which promised to the human mind both 
freedom and progress on paths which had hitherto been almost 
wholly untrodden.* Still earlier, the noblest forms of ancient 
Hellenic art, the Laocoon, the Torso, the Apollo de Belvidere, 
and the Medicean Venus, had been resuscitated, as it were, 
from the tombs in which they had so long been buried. 
There flourished in Italy, Michael Angelo, Leonardo da Vinci, 
Titian, and Raphael ; and in Germany, Holbein and Albert 
Durer. The Copernican system of the universe was discov- 
ered, if not made generally known, in the year in which Co- 
lumbus died, and fourteen years after the discovery of the 
New Continent. 

The importance of this discovery, and of the first coloniza 
tion of Europeans, involves a consideration of other fields of 
inquiry besides those to which these pages are devoted, and 
closely bears upon the intellectual and moral influences exei 
cised on the improvement of the social condition of mankind 
by the sudden enlargement of the accumulated mass of new 
ideas. We would simply draw attention to the fact that, 

die mountainous parts of Quito, Peru, and Chili. These herds consti 
tnted the riches of the nations who were settled there, and were engag- 
ed in the cuhivation of the soil ; in the Cordilleras of South America 
there were no " pastoral nations," and " pastoral life" was not known. 
What are the " tame deer," near the Punta de St. Helena, which are 
mentioned in Herrera, Dec. ii., lib. x., cap. 6 (t. i., p. 471, ed. Amberes, 
1728) 1 These deer are said to have given milk and cheese, " ciervos 
que dan leche y queso y se crian en casa .'" From what source is this 
notice taken ? It can not have arisen from a confusion with the llamas 
(having neither horns nor antlers) of the cold mountainous region, of 
which Garcilaso affirms that in Peru, and especially on the plateau of 
Callao, they were used for plowing. {Comment reales, Part i., lib. v., 
cap. 2, p. 133. Compare, also, Pedro de Cie9a de Leon. Chronica del 
Peru, Sevilla, 1553, cap. 110, p. 264.) This employment of llamas ap- 
pears, however, to have been a rare exception, and a merely local 
custom. In general, the American races were remaikable for their 
deficiency of domesticated animals, and this had a profound influence 
on family life. 

* On the hope which Luther, in the execution of his great and free- 
minded work, placed especially on the younger genex-ation the youtb 
of Germany, see the remarkable expressions in a etter written iu'juuOi 
1518. (Neander, De ViceliOy p. 7.) 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 297 

since this period, a new and more vigorous activity of the mind 
and feeUngs, animated by bold aspirations and hopes which 
can scarcely be frustrated, has gradually penetrated through 
all grades of civil society ; that the scanty population of one 
half of the globe, especially in the portions opposite to Europe, 
has favored the settlements of colonies, which have been con- 
verted by their extent and position into independent states, 
enjoying unlimited power in the choice of their mode of free 
government ; and, finally, that religious reform — the precursor 
of great political revolutions — could not fail to pass through 
the different phases of its development in a portion of the earth 
which had become the asylum of all forms of faith, and of the 
most different views regarding divine things. The daring 
enterprise of the Genoese seaman is the first link in the im- 
measurable chain of these momentous events. Accident, and 
not fraud and dissensions, deprived the continent gf America 
of the name of Columbus.* The New World continuously 

* I have shown elsewhere how a knowledge of the period at which 
Vespucci was named royal chief pilot alone refutes the accusation first 
brought against him by the astronomer Schoner, of Nuremberg, m 
1533, of having artfully inserted the words " Terra di Amerigo'^ in 
charts which he altered. The high esteem which the Spanish court 
paid to the hydrographical and astronomical knowledge of Amerigo 
Vespucci is clearly manifested in the instructions {Real titulo con exten- 
sas facultades) which were given to him when he was appointed piloto 
mayor on the 22d of March, 1508. (Navarrete, t. iii., p. 297-302.) He 
was placed at the head of a true Deposito hydrografico, and was to pre- 
pare for the Casade Contratacion in Seville (the central point of all 
oceanic expedition) a general description of coasts and account of posi- 
tions {Padron general), in which all new discoveries were to be an- 
nually entered. But even as early as 1507 the name of " Americi ter- 
ra" had been proposed for the New Continent by a person whose ex- 
istence even was undoubtedly unknown to Vespucci, the geographer 
WaldseemUller (Martinus Hylacomylus) of Freiburg, in the Breisgau 
(the director of a printing establishment at St. Die in Lorraine), in a 
small work entitled Cosmographies Introductio, insuper quatuor Americi 
Vespucii Navigationes (impr. in oppido S. Deodati, 1507). Ringmann, 
professor of cosmography at Basle (better known under the name of 
Philesius), Hylacomylus, and Father Gregorius Reisch, who edited the 
Margarita Philosophica, were intimate friends. In the last-named 
work we find a treatise written in 1509 by Hylacomylus on architect- 
ure and perspective. {Examen CriL, t. iv., p. 112.) Laurentius Phri- 
sius of Metz, a friend of Hylacomylus, and, like him, patronized by 
Duke Rene of Lorraine, who maint&lt;iined a correspondence with Ves- 
pucci, in the Strasburg edition of Ptolemy, 1522, speaks of Hylacomylus 
as deceased. In the map of the New Continent contained in this edi- 
tion, and drawn by Hylacomylus, the name of America occurs for tho 
first time in the editions of Ptolemy^ s Geography. According to my in- 
vestigations, a map of the world by Petrus Apianus, which w^as onco 
included in Cramer's edition of Solinus, and a second time io ^-be Va 

N 2 



?98 COSMOS. 

brought nearer to Europe during the last half century, by 
means of commercial intercourse and the improvement of nav- 

dian edition of Mela, and represented, like more modern Chinese maps, 
ihe lotlimus of Panama broken through, had appeared two years ear- 
lier. {Examen Crit., t. iv., p. 99-124; t. v., p. 168-176.) It is a great 
error to regard the map of 1527, obtained from the Ebner library at 
Nuremberg, now in Weimar, and the map of 1529 of Diego Ribero, 
■which ditiers from the former, and is engraved by Gussefeld, as tlie 
oldest maps of the New Continent (op. cit., t. ii., p. 184 ; t. iii., p. 191). 
Vespucci had visited the coasts of South America in the expedition of 
Alonso de Hojeda, a year after the third voyage of Columbus, in 1499, 
in company with Juan de la Cosa, whose map, drawn at Puerto de 
Santa Maria in 1500, fully six years before Columbus's death, was first 
made known by myself. Vespucci could not have had any motive for 
feigning a voyage in the year 1497, for he, as well as Columbus, was 
firmly persuaded, until his death, that only parts of Eastern Asia had 
been reached. (Compare the letter of Columbus, February, 1502, to 
Pope Alexander VIL, and another, July, 1506, to Queen Isabella, in 
Navarrete, t. i., p. 304 ; t. ii., p. 280 ; and Vespucci's letter to Pierfran- 
cesco de' Medici, in Bandini's Vita e Leltere di Amerigo Vespucci, p. 66 
and 83.) Pedro de Ledesma, the pilot of Columbus on his third voy- 
age, says, even in 1513, in the lawsuit against the heirs, " that Paria is 
regarded as a part of Asia, la tierra Jirme qne dicese que es de Asia.^' — 
Navarrete, t. iii., p. 539. The frequent periphrases, Mondo nouvo, alter 
Orbis, Colonus novit Orbis repertor, are not at variance with this, as 
they only denote regions not before seen, and are so used by Strabo, 
Mela, Tertullian, Isidore of Seville, and Cadamosto. (^Examen Crit.^ 
t. i., p. 118; t. v., p. 182-184.) For more than twenty years after the 
death of Vespucci, which occurred in 1512, and until the calumnious 
charges of Schoner, in the Opnsculum Geographicum, 1533, and of 
Servet, in the Lyons edition of Ptolemy's Geography of 1535, we find 
no complaint against the Florentine navigator. Christopher Colum- 
Dus, a year before his death, calls him mucho hombre de bien, a man of 
worth, " worthy of all confidence," and " always inclined to render 
bim service." {Carta a mi muy caro fijo D. Diego, in Navarrete, t. i., 
p. 351.) Fernando Colon expresses the same good will toward Ves- 
pucci. He wrote the life of his father in 1535, in Seville, four years 
before his death, and with Juan Vespucci, a nephew of Amerigo's, at- 
tended the astronomical junta of Badajoz, and the proceedings respect- 
ing the possession of the Moluccas. Similar feelings were entertained 
by Petrus Martyr de Anghiera, the personal friend of the admiral, 
whose correspondence goes down to 1525 ; by Oviedo, who seeks for 
every thing which can lessen the fame of Columbus ; by Ramusio ; and 
by the great historian Guicciardini. If Amerigo had intentionally falsi- 
fied the dates of his voyage, he would have brought them into agree 
ment with each other, and not have made the first voyage terminate 
five months after the second began. The confusion of dates in the 
many different translations of his voyages is not to be attributed to him, 
as he did not himself publish any of these accounts. Such confusions 
of figures were, besides, very frequently to be met with in writings 
printed in the sixteenth century. Oviedo had been present, as one of 
the queen's pages, at the audience at which Ferdinand and Isabella, in 
1493, received Columbus with much pomp on his return from his first 
voyage of discovery. Oviedo has three times stated in print that thi* 



OCEANIC DISCOVERIES. 299 

igation, has exercised an important influence on the politica, 
institutions, the ideas and feelings of those nations who occu- 

audience took place in the year 1496, and even that America was dis 
covered in 1491. Gumara had the same printed, not in numerals, but 
in words, and placed the discovery of the tierra Jirme of America in 
1497, in the very year, therefore, which proved so fatal to Amerigo 
Vespucci's reputation. {Examen Crit., t. v., p. 196-202.) The wholly 
irreproachable conduct of the Florentine (who never attempted to at- 
tach his name to the New Continent, but who, in the grandiloquent 
accounts which he addressed to the Gonfalionere Piero GoderinI, to 
Pierfrancesco de' Medici, and to Duke Rene II. of Lorraine, had the 
misfortune of drawing upon himself the attention of posterity more 
than he deserved) is most positively proved by the lawsuit which the 
fiscal authorities carried on from 1508 to 1627 against the heirs of Chris- 
topher Columbus, for the purpose of withdrawing from them the rights 
and privileges which had been granted by the crown to the admiral in 
1492. Amerigo entered the service of the slate as Pilolo mayor in the 
same year that the lawsuit began. He lived at Seville during four 
years of this suit, in which it was to be decided what parts of the New 
Continent had been first reached by Columbus. The most misei'able 
reports found a hearing, and were converted into subjects of accusation 
by the fiscal ; witnesses were sought for at St. Domingo, and all the 
Spanish ports, at Moguer, Palos, and Seville, and even under the eyes 
of Amerigo Vespucci and his nephew Juan. The Mundus Norms, print- 
ed by Johann Otmer, at Augsburg, in 1504 ; the Raccolta di Vicenza 
(Mondo Novo e pacsi novamente refrovati da Alberico Vespuzio Fioren- 
tiuo), by Alessandro Zorzi, in 1507, and generally ascribed to Fracan- 
ziu di Montalboddo ; and the Quatnor Navigationes of Martin Waldsee- 
mtiUer (Hylacomylus), had already appeared. Since 1520, maps had 
been constructed, on which was marked the name of America, which 
had been proposed by Hylacomylus in 1507, and praised by Joachim 
Vadius in a letter addressed to Rudolphus Agricola from Vienna in 1512 ; 
and yet the person to whom widely-circulated writings in Germany, 
France, and Italy attributed a voyage of discoveiy in 1497, to the tier- 
ra Jirme of Paria, was neither cited by the fiscal as a witness in the 
lawsuit which had been begun in 1508, and was continued during 
nineteen years, nor was he even spoken of as the predecessor or the 
jpponent of Columbus. Why, after the death of Amerigo Vespucci 
(22d February, 1512, in Seville), was not his nephew, Juan Vespucci, 
called upon to show (as Martin Alonso, Vicente Yaiiez Pinzon, Juan de 
la Cosa, and Alonso de Hojeda had done) that the coast of Paria, which 
did not derive its importance from its being '• part of the main land of 
Asia," but on account of the productive pearl fishery in its vicinity, 
had been already reached by Amerigo, before Columbus landed there 
on the 1st of August, 1498 ? The disregard of this most important test- 
imony is inexplicable if Amerigo Vespucci had ever boasted of having 
made a voyage of discovery in 1497, or if any serious import had been 
attached at that time to the confused dates and mistakes in the printing 
of the " Quatnor Navigationes.''^ The great and still unprinted work 
of a friend of Columbus, Fra Bartholome de las Casas (the Historia 
general de las Indias), was written, as we know with certainty, at 
very different periods. It was not begun until fifteen years after the 
death of Amerigo in 1527, and was finished in 1559, seven years be- 
fcre the death of the aged author, in his 92d year. Praise and bittei 



800 COSMOS. 

py the eastern shores of the Atlantic, the boundaries of which 
appear to be constantly brought nearer and nearer to one an- 

blarne are strangely mingled in it. We see that dislike and suspicion of 
fraud augmented in proportion as the fame of the Florentine uavigatoj 
spread. In the preface {Prolongo) which was written first, Las Casaa 
says, '• Amerigo relates what he did in two voyages to our Indies, but 
he appears to have passed over many circumstances, whether design- 
edly (a saviendas), or because he did not attend to them. This circum- 
stance has led some to attribute to him that which is due to others, and 
which ought not to be taken from them." The judgment pronounced 
in the 1st book (chap. 140) is equally moderate : ** Here I must speak 
of the injustice which Amerigo, or perhaps those who printed {6 los 
que imprimi&amp;ron) the Quatuor Navigationes, appear to have committed 
toward the admiral. To Amerigo alone, without naming any other, the 
discovery of the continent is ascribed. He is also said to have placed 
the name of America in maps, thus sinfully failing toward the admiral. 
As Amerigo was learned, and had the power of writing eloquently {era 
latino y eloqiiente), he represented himself in the letter to King Ren§ 
as the leader of Hojeda's expedition ; yet he was only one of the sea- 
men, although experienced in seamanship and learned in cosmography 
{hombre entendido en las cosas de la mar y docto en Cosmographia). . . , 
In the world the belief prevails that he was the first to set foot on the 
main laud. If he purposely gave currency to this belief, it was great 
wickedness; and if it was not done intentionally, it looks like it {elara 
pareze la falsedad : y si fue de industria hecha maldad grande fu€ ; y 
ya que no lo fuese, al menos parezelo). . . . Amerigo is represented as 
having sailed in the year 7 (1497): a statement that seems, indeed, to 
have been only an oversight in writing, and not an intentional false 
statement (pareze aver avido yerro de pendola y no malicia), because he 
is stated to have returned at the end of eighteen months. The foreign 
writers call the country America ; it ought to be called Columba." 
This passage shows clearly that up to that time Las Casas had not ac 
cused Amerigo of having himself brought the name America into usage. 
He says, an tornado los escriptores estrangeros de nombrar la nuestra 
Tierra Jirme America, como si Americo solo y no otro con 41 y antes que 
todos la oviera descubierto. In lib. i., cap. 164-169, and in lib. ii., cap. 
2, of the work, his hatred is fully expressed; nothing is now attributed 
to erroneous dates, or to the partiality of foreigners for Amerigo ; all is 
intentional deceit, of which Amerigo himself is guilty (de indvstria lo 
hizo . . . persisito en el engano . . . . de falsedad esta claramente con- 
vencido). Bartholome de las Casas takes pains, moreover, in two pas- 
sages, to show especially that Amerigo, in his accounts, falsified the 
succession of the occurrences of his first two voyages, placing many 
things which belonged to the second voyage in the first, and tnce versa. 
It seems very strange to me that the accuser does not appear to have 
felt how much the weight of his accusations is diminished by the cir- 
cumstance that he himself speaks of the opposite opinion, and of the 
indifference of the person who would have been most interested in. at- 
tacking Vespucci, if he had believed him guilty and ho?tilely disposed 
against his father and himself. '' I can not but wonder," says Las Casas 
(cap. 164), "that Hernando Colon, a clear-sighted man, who, as I cer- 
tainly know, had in his hands Amerigo's accounts of his travels, should 
not have remarked in them any deceit or injustice toward the admi- 
ral." As I had a fresh opportuidty, a few months ago, of examining iho 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 301 

other. See my Examen Crit de VHist. de la Geographic, 
t. iii., p. 154-158 and 225-227.) 



GREAT DISCOVERIES IN THE HEAVENS BY THE APPLICATION OF THE 
TELESCOPE.— PRINCIPAL EPOCHS IN THE HISTORY OF ASTRONOMY 
AND MATHEMATICS, FROM GALILEO AND KEPLER TO NEWTON AND 
LEIBNITZ. — LAWS OF THE PLANETARY MOTIONS AND GENERAL 
THEORY OF GRAVITATION. 

After having endeavored to enumerate the most distinctly 
defiued periods and stages of development in the history of" the 
contemplation of the universe, we have proceeded to delineate 
the epoch in which the civilized nations of one hemisphere be- 
came acquainted with the inhabitants of the other. The pe 
riods of the greatest discoveries in space over the surface of 
our planet was immediately succeeded by the revelations of 

rare manuscript of Bartholome de las Casas, I would wish to embody iu 
this long note what I did not employ iu 1839 in my Examen Critique 
t. v., p. 178-217. The conviction which I then expressed, in the same 
volume, p. 217 and 224, has remained unshaken. " Where the desig- 
nation of a large continent, generally adopted as such, and consecrated 
by the usage of many ages, presents itself to us as a monument of hu- 
man injustice, it is natural that we should at first sight attribute the 
cause to the person who would appear most interested in the matter. 
A careful study of the documentary evidence has, however, shown 
that this supposition in the present instance is devoid of foundation, and 
that the name of America has originated in a distant region (as, for in- 
stance, in France and Germany), owing to many concurrent circum 
stances which appear to remove all suspicion from Vespucci. Here 
historical criticism stops, for the field of unknown causes and possiblt 
moral contingencies does not come within the domain of positive his- 
tory. We here find a man who, during a long life, enjoyed the esteem 
of his cotemporaries, raised by his attainments in nautical astronomy 
to an honorable employment. The concuri'ence of many fortuitous 
circumstances gave him a celebrity which has weighed upon his memo- 
ry, and helped to throw discredit on his character. Such a position ia 
indeed rare in the history of human misfortunes, and afibrds an instance 
of a moral stain deepened by the glory of an illustrious name. It seems 
most desirable to examine, amid this mixture of success and adversity, 
what is owing to the navigator himself, to the accidental errors arising 
from a hasty supervision of his writings, or to the indiscretion of dan- 
gerous friends." Copernicus himself contributed to this dangerous 
celebrity, for he also ascribes the discovery of the new part of the globe 
to Vespucci. In discussing the " centrum gravitatis^' and " centrum 
magniludinis'^ of the continent, he adds, " magis id erit clarum, si ad- 
dentur insulae aetate nostra sub Hispaniarum Lusitaniseque principibus 
reperta} et prajsertim America ab inventore denominata navium pra,-- 
fecto, quem, ob incompertam ejus adhuc magnitudinem,alterum orbem 
terrarum putent." {Nicolai Copernici de Revolutionibus Orbium Copies- 
Hum, libri sex, 1543, p. 2, a.) 



302 COSMOS. 

the telescope, through which man may be said to have taken 
possession of a considerable portion of the heavens. The ap- 
plication of a newly-created organ — an instrument possessed 
of the power of piercing the depths of space — calls forth a new 
world of ideas. Now began a brilliant age of astronomy and 
mathematics ; and in the latter, the long series of profound 
inquirers, leading us on to the " all transforming" Leonhard 
Euler, the year of whose bn-th (1707) is so near that of the 
death of Jacques Bernouilli. 

A few names will suffice to give an idea of the gigantic 
strides with which the human mind advanced in the seven- 
teenth century, especially in the development of mathematical 
induction, under the influence of its own subjective force rath- 
er than from the incitement of outward circumstances. The 
laws which control the fall of bodies and the motions of the 
planets were now recognized. The pressure of the atmosphere ; 
the propagation of light, and its refraction and polarization, 
were investigated. Mathematical physics were created, and 
based on a firm foundation. The invention of the infinitesi- 
mal calculus characterizes the close of the century ; and, 
strengthened by its aid, human understanding has been ena- 
bled, during the succeeding century and a half, successfully to 
venture on the solution of the problems presented by the per- 
turbations of the heavenly bodies ; by the polarization and in- 
terference of the waves of light ; by the radiation of heat ; by 
electro-magnetic re-entering currents ; by vibrating chords 
and surfaces ; by the capillary attraction of narrow tubes ; and 
by many other natural phenomena. 

Henceforward the work in the world of thought progresses 
uninterrupted] y, each portion continually contributing its aid 
to the remainder. None of the earlier germs are stifled. 
With the abundance of the materials to be elaborated, strict- 
ness in the methods and improvements in the instruments of 
observation are simultaneously increased. We will here limit 
ourselves more especially to the seventeenth century, the age 
of Kepler, Galileo, and Bacon, of Tycho Brahe, Descartes, 
and Huygens, of Fermat, Newton, and Leibnitz. The labors 
of these distinguished inquirers are so generally known, that 
slight references will be sufficient to point out those portions 
by which they have most brilliantly contributed to the en- 
largement of cosmical views. 

We have already shown* how the discovery of telescopic 
vision gave to the eye — the organ of the sensuous contempla* 
* See Cosmos, vol. i., p. 83. 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 303 

tioxi of the universe — a power from whose limits we are still 
far removed, and which, in its first feeble beginning, when 
scarcely magnifying thirty-two linear diameters,* was yet en 
abled to penetrate into depths of space which until then had 
remained closed to the eyes of man. The exact knowledge of 
many of the heavenly bodies which belong to our solar system, 
the eternal laws which regulate their revolution in their orbits, 
and the more perfect insight into the true structure of the uni- 
verse, are the characteristics of the age which I am here de- 
lineating. The results produced by this epoch determine the 
principal outlines of the great natural picture of the Cosmos, 
and add to the earlier investigated contents of terrestrial space 
the newly-acquired knowledge of the contents of the celestial 
regions, at least with reference to the well-organized arrange- 
ment of one planetary group. In my desire of assuming only 
general views, I will confine myself to the consideration of 
the most important objects of the astronomical labors of thd 
seventeenth century. I would here refer to their influence 
in powerfully inciting to great and unexpected mathematical 
discoveries, and to more comprehensive and grander views of 
the universe. 

T have already remarked that the age of Columbus, Gama, 
and Magellan — the age of great maritime enterprises — coin- 
cided in a most wonderful manner with many great events, 
with the awakening of a feeling of religious freedom, with the 
development of nobler sentiments for art, and with the diffu- 
sion of the Copernican views regarding the system of the uni- 
verse. Nicolaus Copernicus (who, in two letters still extant, 
calls himself Koppernik) had already attained his twenty- 
first year, ani was engaged in making observations with the 
astronomer Albert Brudzewski, at Cracow, when Columbus 
discovered America. Hardly a year after the death of the 
great discoverer, and after a six years' residence at Padua, 
Bologna, and Rome, we find him returned to Cracow, and 
busily engaged in bringing about a thorough revolution in the 
astronomical views of the universe. By the favor of his un- 
cle, Lucas Waisselrode of Allen, bishop of Ermland, he was 
nomiiiated, in 1510, canon of Frauenburg, where he labored 

* '* The telescopes which Galileo constructed, and others of which 
he made use for observing Jupiter's satellites, the phases of Venus, and 
the solar spots, possessed the gradually increasing powers of magnify- 
ing four, seven, and thirty-two linear diameters, but they never had a 
higher power." (Arago, in the Annuaire du Bureau des Longitudes pour 
Van. 1842, p. 268.) 



304 COSMOS. 

for thirty-three years on the completion, of his work, entitled 
De Revolutio7iibus Orbium Ccelestiuin* The first printed 
copy was brought to him when, shattered in mind and body, 
he was preparing himself for death. He saw it and touched 
it, but his thoughts were no longer fixed on earthly things, 
and he died — not, as Gassendi says, a few hours, but several 
days afterward (on the 24th of May, 1543t). Two years 

* Westphal, in his Biographic des Copernicus (1822, s. 33), dedicated 
to the great astronomer of Konigsberg, Bessel, calls the Bishop of Erm- 
laud Lucas Watzelrodt von Allen, as does also Gassendi. According 
to explanations which I have very recently obtained, through the kind 
ness of the learned historian of Prussia, Voigt, director of the Archives, 
" the family of the mother of Copernicus is called in original documents 
Weiselrodt, Weisselrot, Weisselmdt, and most commonly WaisselroJe. 
His mother was undoubtedly of German descent, and the family of 
Waisselrode, who were originally distinct from that of Von Allen, which 
had flourished at Thorn from the beginning of the 15th century, prob- 
ably took the latter name in addition to their own, through adoption, or 
from family connections." Sniadecki and Czynski (Kopernik ei ses 
Travaux, 1847, p. 26) call the mother of the great Copernicus Barba- 
ra VVasselrode, and state that she was married at Thorn, in 1464, to his 
father, whose family they believe to be of Bohemian origin. The name 
of the astronomer, which Gassendi writes Tornaeus Borussus, Westphal 
and Czynksi write Kopernik, and Krzyzianowski, Kopirnig. In a let 
terof the Bishop of Ermland, Martin Cromer of Heilsberg, dated Nov. 
21, 1580. it is said, " Cum Jo. (Nicolaus) Copernicus vivens ornamento 
fuerit, atque etiam nunc post fata sit, non solum huic ecclesia?, verum 
etiam toti Prussiae patriae suae, iniquam esse puto, eum post obitum ca- 
rere honor esepulchri sive monumenti." 

t Thus Gassendi, in Nicolai Copemici Vita, appended to his biography 
of Tycho {Tychonis Brahei Vita, 1655, Hagae Comitum, p. 320): " eo- 
dem die et horis non multis priusquam animam efflaret." It is only 
Schubert, in his Astronomy, th. i., s. 115, and Robert Small, in the very- 
learned Acconnt of the Astronomical Discoveries of Kepler, 1804, p. 92, 
who maintain that Copernicus died "a few clays after the appearance 
of his work." This is also the opinion of Voigt, the director of the Ar- 
chives at K5nigsberg; because, in a letter which George Donner, canon 
of Ermland, wrote to the Duke of Prussia shortly after the death of 
Copernicus, it is said that " the estimable and worthy Doctor Nicolaus: 
Koppernick sent forth his work, like the sweet song of the swan, a short 
time before his departure from this life of sorrows." According to the 
ordinarily received opinion (Westphal, Niholaiis Kopernikus, 1822, s. 
73 und s. 82), the work was begun in 1507, and was so far completed 
in 1530 that only a few corrections were subsequently added. The 
publication was hastened by a letter from Cardinal Schonberg, written 
from Rome in 1536, The cardinal wishes to have the manuscript cop- 
ied and sent to him by Theodor von Reden. We learn from Copei'ni- 
cus himself, in his dedication to Pope Paul III., that the performance 
of the work has lingered on into the quartum novennium. If we remem- 
ber how much time was required for printing a work of 400 pages, and 
that the great man died in May. 1543, it may be conjectured that the 
dedication was not written in the last-named year which, reckoning 
backward thirty-six years, would not give us a later, but an earlier yeat 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 805 

earlier an important part of his theory had been made known 
by the publication of a letter of one of his most zealous pupils 
and adherents, Joachim Rhseticus to Johann Schoner, profess- 
or at Nuremberg. It was not, however, the propagation of 
the Copernican doctrines, the renewed opinion of the existence , 
of one central sun, and of the diurnal and annual movement 
of the earth, which somewhat more than half a century aftei 
its first promulgation led to the brilliant astronomical discov- 
eries that characterize the commencement of the seventeenth 
century ; for these discoveries were the result of the accident- 
al invention of the telescope, and were the means of at onco 
perfecting and extending the doctrine of Copernicus. Con- 
firmed and extended by the results of physical astronomy (by 
the discovery of the satellite-system of Jupiter and the phases 
of Venus), the fundamental views of Copernicus have indica- 
ted to theoretical astronomy paths which could not fail to lead 
to sure results, and to the solution of problems which of ne- 
cessity demanded, and led to a greater degree of perfection in 
the analytic calculus. While George Peuerbach and Regio- 
montanus (Johann Miiller, of Konigsberg, in Franconia) ex- 
ercised a beneficial influence on Copernicus and his pupils 
Rhseticus, Reinhold, and Mostlin, these, in their turn, influ- 
enced in a like manner, although at longer intervals of time, 
the works of Kepler, Galileo, and Newton. These are the 
ideal links which connect the sixteenth and seventeenth cen- 
turies ; and we can not delineate the extended astronomical 
views of the latter of these epochs without taking into consid- 
eration the incitements yielded to it by the former. 

An erroneous opinion unfortunately prevails, even in the 
present day,* that Copernicus, from timidity and from appre- 
hension of priestly persecution, advanced his views regarding 
the planetary movement of the earth, and the position of the 
sun in the center of the planetary system, as mere hypotheses, 
which fulfilled the object of submitting the orbits of the heav- 
enly bodies more conveniently to calculation, "but which need 

than 1507. Herr Voifjt doubts whether the aqueduct and hydraulic 
works at Frauenbrirg, generally ascribed to Copernicus, were really ex- 
ecuted in accordance with his designs. He finds that, so late as 1571, 
a contract was concluded between the Chapter and the " skillful mas- 
ter Valentine Lendel, manager of the water-works at Breslau," to bring 
the water to Frauenburg, from the mill-ponds to the houses of the can- 
ons. Nothing is said of any previous water-works, and those which ex- 
ist at present can not have been commenced until twenty-eight yeari 
after the death of Copernicus. 

* Delambre, Histoire De V Astronomie Moderne, t. i., p. 14C. 



806 COSMOS, 

not necessarily cither be true or even probable." These sin- 
gular words certainly do occur in the anonymous preface* at- 
tached to the work of Copernicus, and inscribed De Hypothe- 
sibus hujus Operis, but they are quite contrary to the opinions 
expressed by Copernicus, and in direct contradiction with his 
dedication to Pope Paul III. The author of these prefatory 
remarks was, as Gassendi most expressly says, in his Life of 
the great astronomer, a mathematician then living at Nurem* 
berg, and named Andreas Osiander, who, together with Scho- 

* " Neque enim necesse est, eas hypotheses esse veras, irao ne veri- 
similes quidem, sed sufficit hoc unum, si calculum observationibus con 
gnieutem exhibeant," says the preface of Osiander. " The Bishop o^ 
Culm, Tidemann Gise, a native of Dantzic, who had for years urged 
Copernicus to publish his work, at last received the manuscript, with 
the permission of having it printed fully in accordance with his own free 
pleasure. He sent it first to Rhaeticus, professor at Wittenberg, who 
had, until recently, been living for a long time with his teacher at 
Frauenburg. Rhaeticus considered Nuremberg as the most suitable 
place for its publication, and intrusted the superintendence of the print- 
ing to Professor Schoner and to Andreas Osiander." (Gassendi, Vita 
Copernici, p. 319.) The expressions of praise pi'onouuced on the work 
at the close of the preface might be sufficient to show, without the ex- 
press testimony of Gassendi, that the preface was by another hand. 
Osiander has used an expression on the title of the first edition (that of 
Nuremberg, 1543) which is always carefully avoided in all the writings 
of Copernicus, " motus stellarum novis insuper ac admirabilibus hypo 
thesibus ornati," together with the very ungentle addition, "Igitur 
Btudiose lector, eme, lege, fruere," In the second Basle edition of 1566 
which I have very carefully compared with the first Nuremberg edition, 
there is no longer any reference in the title of the book to the "admi- 
rable hypothesis ;" but Osiander's PrcBfatiunaila de Hypothesihus hujus 
Ope7-is," as Gassendi calls the intercalated preface, is preserved. That 
OsiaJider, without naming himself, meant to show that the Prcefatiun- 
C7ila w^as by a different hand from the work itself, appears very evident, 
from the circumstance of his designating the dedication to Paul III. as 
the Prcefatio Ar/thoris." The first edition has only 196 leaves; the sec- 
ond 213, on account of the Narratio Prima of the astronomer George 
Joachim Rhaeticus, and a letter addressed to Schoner, which, as I have 
remarked in the text, was printed in 1541 by the intervention of the 
mathematician Gassarus of Basle, and gave to the learned world the 
first accurate knowledge of the Copernican system. Rhaaticus had re- 
signed his professional chair at Wittenberg, in order that he might 
enjoy the instructions of Copernicus at Frauenburg itself. (Compare, 
on these subjects, Gassendi, p. 310-319.) The explanation of what 
Osiander was induced to add from timidity is given by Gassendi: "An- 
dreas porro Osiander fuit, qui non modo operarum inspector (the su- 
perintendent of the printing) fuit, sed Praefatiunculam quoque ad lec- 
torem (tacito licet nomine) de Hypothesihus operis adhibuit. Ejus in 
ea consilium fuit, ut, tametsi Copernicus Motum Terrse habuisset, non 
solum pro Hypothesi, sed pro vero etiam placito, ipse tamen ad rem, ob 
illos, qui hinc offenderentur, leniendam, excusatum eum faceret, quasi 
talera motura non pro dograate, sed pro Hypothesi mera assumpsisseL*'' 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 307 

ner, superintended the printing of the work De Revolutio?tibus, 
and who, although he makes no express declaration of any re- 
ligious scruples, appears nevertheless to have thought it expe- 
dient to speak of the new views as of an hypothesis, and not, 
like Copernicus, as of demonstrated truth. 

The founder of our present system of the universe (for to 
him incontestably belong the most important parts of it, and 
the grandest features ol the design) was almost more distin- 
guished, if possible, by the intrepidity and confidence with 
which he expressed his opinions, than for the knowledge to 
which they owed their origin. He deserves to a high degree 
the fine eulogium passed upon him by Kepler, who, in the in- 
troduction to the Iludolphine Tables, says of him, " Vir fuit 
maximo inge7iio et quod in lioc exercitio (combating preju- 
dices) 7nagni momenti est, amino liber T When Copernicus 
is describing, in his dedication to the pope, the origin of his 
work, he does not scruple to term the opinion generally ex- 
pressed among theologians of the immobility and central posi- 
tion of the earth " an absurd acroama," and to attack the 
stupidity of those who adhere to so erroneous a doctrine. "If 
even," he writes, " any empty-headed babblers (fiaraLoXoyoi), 
ignorant of all mathematical science, should take upon them- 
selves to pronounce judgment on his work through an inten- 
tional distortion of any passage in the Holy Scriptures (prop- 
ter aliquem locum scripturce male ad sutim pi'ojyositum detor- 
turn), he should despise so presumptuous an attack. It was, 
indeed, universally known that the celebrated Lactantius, 
who, however, could not be reckoned among mathematicians, 
had spoken childishly [pueriliter) of the form of the earth, de- 
riding those who held it to be spherical. On mathematical 
subjects one should write only to mathematicians. In order 
to show that, deeply penetrated with the truth of his own de- 
ductions, he had no cause to fear the judgment that might be 
passed upon him, he turned his prayers from a remote corner 
of the earth to the head of the Church, begging that he would 
protect him from the assaults of calumny, since the Church 
itself would derive advantage from his investigations on the 
length of the year and the movements of the moon." Astrol- 
ogy and improvements in the calendar long procured protec- 
tion lor astronomy from the secular and ecclesiastical powers, 
as chemistry and botany were long esteemed as purely subserv- 
ient auxiharies to the science of medicine. 

The strong and free expressions employed by Copernicus 
gufficiently refute the old opinion that he advanced the sys* 



508 COSMOS. 

tern which bears his immortal name as an hypothesis con- 
venient for making astronomical calculations, and one which 
might be devoid of foundation. " By no other arrangement," 
he exclaims with enthusiasm, " have I been able to find so ad- 
mirable a symmetry of the universe, and so harmonious a con- 
nection of orbits, as by placing the lamp of the world {lucer- 
nam mundi), the Sun, in the midst of the beautiful temple of 
nature as on a kingly throne, ruling the whole family of cir- 
cling stars that revolve around him {circumagentem guhernans 
astrorumfamiliam)."* Even the idea of universal gravita- 
tion or attraction {appetentia qumdam naturalis partibus in- 
dita) toward the sun as the center of the world {centrum 
mundi), and which is inferred from the force of gravity in 
spherical bodies, seems to have hovered before the mind of 
this great man, as is proved by a remarkable passage in the 
9th chapter of the 1st book De Revolutionibus.\ 

* Quis enim in hoc pulcherrimo templo lampadem banc in alio vel 
meliori loco poueret, quam unde totum simul possit illuminare? Siqui- 
dem non inepte quidam lucernara mundi, alii mentem, alii rectorera 
vocant. Trismegistus visibilem Deum, Sophoclis Electra intuentem 
ouinia. Ita profecto tanqiiam in solio regal i Sol residens circumagen- 
tem gubernat Astrorum lamiliara : Tellus quoque miuirne fraudatur lu- 
nar! ministerio, sed ut Aristoteles de animalibus ait, maximam Luna 
cum terra cognationem habet. Concepit iuterea a Sole terra, et im- 
pregnatur annuo partu. Invenimus igitur sub hac ordinatione admi- 
raudam mundi symmetriam ac certum harmoniiE nexum motus et mag- 
nitudinis orbium; qualis alio raodo reperiri non potest. (Nicol. Copern., 
De Revol. Orbium Coelestium, lib. i., cap. 10, p. 9, b.) In this passage, 
which is not devoid of poetic grace and elevation of expi-ession, we rec 
ognize, as in all the wrorks of the astronomers of the seventeenth cen 
tury, traces of long acquaintance with the beauties of classical antiquity 
Copernicus had in his mind Cic, Somn. Scip., c. 4 ; Pliu., ii., 4 ; and 
Mercur. Trismeg., lib. v. (ed. Cracov., 1586), p. 195 and 201. The al- 
lusion to the Electra of Sophocles is obscure, as the sun is never any 
where expressly termed "all-seeing," as in the Iliad and the Odyssey, 
and also in the Choephorcs of .4:schylus (v. 980), which Co})ernicua 
would not probably have called Electra. According to BSckh's con- 
jecture, the allusion is to be ascribed to an imperfect recollection of 
verse 869 of the CEdipus Coloneus of Sophocles.^ It very singularly 
happens that quite lately, in an otherwise instructive memoir (Czynski, 
Kopernik et ses Travaux, 1847, p. 102), the Electra of the tragedian is 
confounded with electric currents. The passage of Copernicus, quoted 
above, is thus rendered : " If we take the sun for the torch of the uni- 
verse, for its spirit and its guide — if Trismegistes call it a god, and if 
Sophocles consider it to be an electrical power which animates and 
contemplates all that is contained in creation — " 

t Pluribus ergo existentibus centris, de centro quoque mundi non 
temere quis dubitabit, an videlicet fuerit istud gravitatis terrense, an 
aliud. Equidem existimo, gravitatem non aliud esse, quam appeten- 
tiam quaudam naturalem partibus inditam a divina provideutia officii 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 30{) 

On considering ths different stages of the development of 
cosmical contemplation, we are able to trace from the earliest 
ages faint indications and presentiments of the attraction of 
masses and of centrifugal forces. Jacobi, in his researches on 
the mathematical knowledge of the Greeks (unfortunately still 
in manuscript), justly comments on "the profound considera- 
tion of nature evinced by Anaxagoras, in whom we read with 
astonishment a passage asserting that the moon, if its centrif- 
ugal force ceased, would fall to the earth like a stone from a 
sling."* 

I have already, when speaking of aerolites, noticed similar 
expressions of the Clazomenian and of Diogenes of Apollonia 
on the " cessation of the rotatory force."! Plato truly had a 
clearer idea than Aristotle of the attractive force exercised by 
the earth's center on all heavy masses removed from it, for the 
Stagirite was indeed acquainted, like Hipparchus, with the 
acceleration of falling bodies, although he did not correctly un- 
derstand the cause. In Plato, and according to Democritus, 
attraction is limited to bodies having an affinity for one an- 

universorum, ut iii unitatem integritatemque suam sese conferant in 
formam globi cofeuntes. Qiiatn atfectionein credibile est etiam Soli, 
Luiiaj, CiJBterisque errantiam fulgoribus iuesse, ut ejus efficncia iti ea 
qua se reprsesentant rotunditate pernianeant, quae nihilominus multia 
modia suos efficiuut circuitus. Si igitur et terra facial alios, utpote se- 
cundum centrum (mundi), necesse erit eos esse qui similiter extriuse- 
cus in multis apparent, in quibus invenimus annuum circuitum. Ipse 
denique Sol medium mundi putabitur possidere, quae omnia ratio ordi- 
nis, quo ilia sibi invicem succedunt, et mundi totius harmonia nos do 
cet, si modo rem ipsam ambobus (ut aiunt) oculis inspiciamus." (Co 
pern., Ve RevoL Orb. Ccel., lib. i., cap. 9, p. 7, b.) 

* Pint., De Facie in Orhe Lnnof, p. 923. (Compare Idieler, Meteor o 
login veterum Grcecorum et Romanoi-um, 1832, p. 6.) In the passage of 
Plutarch, Anaxagoras is not named ; but that the latter applied tho 
same theoiy of "falling where the force of rotation had been intermit- 
ted" to all (the material) celestial bodies, is shown in Diog. Laert., ii., 
12, and by the many passages which I have collected (p. 122). Com- 
pare, also, Aristot., De Coelo, ii., 1, p. 284, a. 24, Bekker, and a remarkable 
passage of Simplicius, p. 491, b., in the Scholia, according to the edition 
of the Berlin Academy, where the " non-falling of heavenly bodies" is 
noticed " when the rotatory force predominates ovef the actual falling 
force or downward attraction." With these ideas, which also partially 
belong to Empedocles and Democritus, as well as to Anaxagora? may 
be connected the instance adduced by Simplicius (1. c), "that water 
in a vial is not spilled when the movement of rotation is more rapid 
than the downward movement of the water," r^f kxl to kuto) tov v6aT0( 

t See Cosmos, vol. i., p. 134. (Compare Letronne, Des Cptnion* 
Cotmographicjues ies Peres de VEglise,\\i the Revue dea Deux Mondes^ 
1834, Coawo* t. i , p. 621.) 



SIO COSMOS. 

other, or, in other words, to those in which there exists a tend 
ency of the hmnogeneous elementary substances to combine 
together.* John PhiJoponus, the Alexandrian, a pupil of Am- 
monius, the son of Hermias, who probably lived in the sixth 
century, was the first who ascribed the movement of the heav- 
enly bodies to a primitive impulse, connecting with this idea 
that of the fall of bodies, or the tendency of all substances, 
whether heavy or light, to reach the ground. t The idea con- 
ceived by Copernicus, and more clearly expressed by Kepler, 
jn his admirable work De Stella Martis, who even applied it 
to the ebb and flow of the ocean, received in 1666 and 1674 
a new impulse and a more extended application through the 
sagacity of the ingenious Robert Hooke ;f Newton's theory of 
gravitation, which followed these earlier advances, presented 
the grand means of converting the whole of physical astrono- 
my into a true 7nechamsm of the heaveiis.k 

Copernicus, as we find not only from his dedication to the 
pope, but also from several passages in the work itself, had a 
tolerable knowledge of the ideas entertained by the ancients 
of the structure of the universe. He, however, only names in 
the period anterior to Hipparchus, Hicetas (or, as he always 
calls him, Nicetas) of Syracuse, Philolaiis the Pythagorean, 
the Timseus of Plato, Ecphantus, Heraclides of Pontus, and 
the great geometrician ApoUonius of Perga. Of the two 
mathematicians, Aristarchus of Samos and Seleucus of Baby- 
lon, whose systems came most nearly to his own, he mentions 
only the first, making no reference to the second. H It has 

• See, regarding all that relates to the ideas of the ancients on at- 
traction, gravity, and the fall of bodies, the passages collected with great 
industry and discrimination, by Th. Henri Martin, Etudes sur le Tim6e 
de Plaion, 1841, t. ii., p. 272-280, and 341. 

t Joli. Philoponus, De Creatione Mundi, lib. i., cap. 12. 

t He subsequently relinquished the correct opinion (Brewster, Mar 
tyrs of Science, 1846, p. 211) ; but the opinion that there dwells in the 
central body of the planetary system — the sun — a power which governs 
the movements of the planets, and that this solar force decreases either 
as the squares of the distances or in direct ratio, was expressed by Kep- 
ler in the Harmonices Mundi, completed in 1618. 

$ See Cosmos, vol. i., p. 48 and 63. 

II See op.-cit., p. 177. The scattered passages to be found in the 
work of Copernicus, relating to the ante-Hipparchian system of the 
structure of the universe, are, exclusive of the dedication, the following : 
lib. i., cap. 5 and 10 ; lib. v., cap. 1 and 3 (ed. princ, 1543, p. 3, b. ; 
7,b.; 8, b.; 133, b. ; 141 and 141, b. ; 179 and 181, b.). Eveiy where 
Copernicus shows a predilection for, and a very accurate acquaintance 
with, the views of the Pythagoreans, or, to speak less definitely, with 
those which were attributed to the most anient among them. Thua 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 811 

often been asserted that he was not acquainted with th^s viewa 
of Aristarchus of Samos regarding the central sun and the 
condition of the earth as a planet, because the Arenarius, and 
all the other works of Archimedes, appeared only one year 
after his death, and a whole century after the invention of the 
art of printing ; but it is forgotten that Copernicus, in his ded- 
ication to Pope Paul III., quotes a long passage on Philolaiis, 
Ecphantus, and Heraclides of Pontus, from Plutarch's work 
on The Opinions of Philosophers (III., 13), and therefore 
that he might have read in the same work (II., 24) that Ar- 
istarchus of Samos regards the sun as one of the fixed, stars. 

for instance, he was acquainted, as may be seen by the beginning of the 
dedication, with the letter of Lysis to Hipparchus, which, indeed, shows 
that the Italian school, in its love of mystery, intended only to commu- 
nicate its opinions to friends, " as had also at first been the purpose of 
Copernicus." The age in which Lysis lived is somewhat uncertain ; 
he is sometimes spoken of as an immediate disciple of Pythagoras him- 
self; sometimes, and with more probability, as a teacher of Epaminou- 
das (Bockh, Philolaos, s. 8-15^. The letter of Lysis to Hipparchus, an 
old Pythagorean, who had disclosed the secrets of the sect, is, like 
many similar writings, a forgery of later times. It had probably be- 
come known to Copernicus from the collection of Aldus Manutius, 
Epistola diversorum Philosophorum (Romae, 1494), or from a Latin trans* 
lation by Cardinal Bessarion (Venet., 1516). In the prohibition of Co- 
pernicus's work, De Revolutionibus, in the famous decree of the Cort' 
gregazione delV Indice of the 5th of March, 1616, the new system of 
the universe is expressly designated as " falsa ilia doctrina Pythagorica^ 
Divinae Scripturse omnino adversans." The important passage on Aris- 
tarchus of Samos, of which I have spoken in the text, occurs in the 
Arenarius,\i. 449 of the Paris edition of Archimedes of 1615, by David 
Rivaltus. The editio princeps is the Basle edition of 1544, apud Jo. 
Hervagium. The passage in the Arenarius says, very distinctly, that 
'' Aristarchus had confuted the astronomers who supposed the earth to 
be immovable in the center of the universe. The sun, which constitu- 
ted this center, was immovable like the other stars, while the earth 
revolved round the sun." In the work of Copernicus, Aristarchus is 
twice named, p. 69, b., and 79, without any reference being made to 
his system. Ideler, in Wolf and Buttmann's Museum der Alterthums 
wissenschaft (bd. ii., 1808, s. 452), asks whether Copernicus was ac 
quainted with Nicolaus de Cusa's work, De Docta Ignorantia. The first 
Paris edition was indeed published in 1514, and the expression "jam 
nobis manifestum est terram in veritate moveri," from a Platonizing car 
dinal, might certainly have made some impression on the Canon of 
Frauenburg (Whewell, Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, \ol. ii., p. 
343) ; but a fragment of Cusa's writing, discovered very recently (1843) 
by Clemens in the library of the Hospital at Cues, proves sufficiently, as 
does the work De Venatione Sapientice, cap. 28, that Cusa imagined that 
the earth did not move round the sun, but that they moved together, 
though more slowly, " round the constantly changing pole of the uni 
verse." (Clemens, iii Giordano Bruno, and Nicol. von Cusa, 1847, s. 
97-109.) 



312 . COSMOS. " 

Among all the opinions of the ancients, those which appeared 
to exercise the greatest influence on the direction and gradual 
development of the ideas of Copernicus are expressed, accord- 
ing to Gassendi, in a passage in the encyclopaedic work of Mar- 
tianus Mineus Capella, written in a half-barbarous language, 
and in the System of the World of ApoUonius of Perga. Ac- 
cording to the opinions described by Martianus Mineus of 
Madaura, and which have been very confidently ascribed, 
sometimes to the Egyptians, and sometimes to the Chaldeans,* 

* See the profound treatment of this subject in Martin, Etudes sur 
Timie, t. ii., p. Ill, Cosmographie des Egyptieiis), and p. 129-133) An- 
Uc6dents dn Systeme de Copernic). The assertion of this learnecf phi 
lologist, that the original system of Pythagoras differed fi-om that of 
Philolatis, and that it regarded the earth as fixed in the center of the 
universe, does not appear to me to be entirely conclusive (t. ii., p. 103 
and 107). 1 would here exphiin myself more fully respecting the re- 
markable statement of Gassendi regarding the similarity of the systems 
of Tycho Brahe and ApoUonius of Perga, to which I have referred in 
the text. We find tiie following passage in Gassendi's biographies : 
" Magnam imprimis rationem habuit Copernicus duarum opinionum 
affiuium, quarum unam Martiano Capelhe, alteram Apollonio Pergaco 
attribuit. ApoUonius solem delegit, circa quem, ut centrum, non mode 
Mercurius et Venus, verum etiam Mars, Jupiter, Saturnus suas obirent 
periodos, dura Sol interim, uti et Luna, circa Terrum, ut circa centrum, 
quod foret Affixarum mundique centrum, movereutur ; quae deinceps 
quoque opinio Tychouis propemodum fuit. Rationem autem magnam 
hanrm opinionum Copernicus habuit, quod utraque eximie Mercurii ac 
Veneris circuitiones repra.sentaret, eximieque causam retrogradatio- 
oum, directionum, statiouum in iis apparentium exprimeretet posterior 
(PergcBi) quoque in tribus Planetis superioribus pruestaret." (Gassendi, 
Tychonis Brahei Vita, p. 296.) My friend the astronomer Galle, to 
vvhom I api)lied for information, agrees with me in thinking that noth 
uig could justify Gassendi's decided statement. " In the passages," he 
writes to me, " to which you refer in Ptolemy's Almagest (in the com 
meucemeut of book xii.), and in the works of Copernicus (lib. v., cap 
3, p. 141, a. ; cap. 35, p. 179, a. and b. ; cap. 36, p. 181, b.), the only 
questions considered are the retrogressions and stationary conditions of 
the planets, in which ApoUonius's assumption of their revolution round 
the sun is indeed referred to (and Copernicus himself mentions express* 
ly the assumption of the earth's standing still), but it can not be de- 
termined when he became acquainted with what he supposes to have 
been derived from ApoUonius. We can only, therefore, conjecture that 
he assumed, on some later authority, that ApoUonius of Perga had con- 
istructed a system similar to that of Tycho, although I do not find, even 
hi Copernicus, any clear exposition of such a system, or any reference 
to ancient passages in which it may be spoken of. If lib. xii. of the 
A.lmagest should be the only source from whence the complete Tycho- 
nic view is ascribed to ApoUonius, we may consider that Gassendi has 
gone too far in his suppositions, and that the case is precisely the same 
as that of the phases of Mercury and Venus, of which Copernicus spoke 
(lib. i., cap- 10, p. 7, b., and 8, a.), without decidedly applying them to 
his system. ApoUonius may, perhaps, in a similar manner, have treat 



DISUOVERIES^N THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 313 

the earth is immovably fixed in a central point, while the sun 
revolves around it as a circling- planet, attended by two satel- 
lites, Mercury and Venus. Such a view of the structure of 
the world might, indeed, prepare the way for that of the cen- 
tral force of the sun. There is, however, nothing in the Al- 
magest, or in the works of the ancients generally, or in tho 
work of Copernicus, De Revolutionibus, which justifies the 
assertion so confidently maintained by Gassendi, of the perfect 
resemblance existing between the system of Tycho Brahe and 
that which has been ascribed to Apollonius of Perga. After 
Bockh's complete investigation, nothing further need be said 
of the confusion of the Copernican system with that of the 
Pythagorean, Philolaiis, according to which, the non-rotating 
earth (the Antichthon or opposite earth, being not in itself a 
planet, but merely the opposite hemisphere of our planet) 
moves like the sun itself round the focus of the world — the 
central fire, or vital flame of the whole planetary system. 

The scientific revolution originated by Nicolaus Copernicus 
has had the rare fortune (setting aside the temporary retro- 
grade movement imparted by the hypothesis of Tycho Brahe) 
of advancing without interruption to its object — the discovery 
of the true structure of the universe. The rich abundance of 
accurate observations furnished by Tycho Brahe himself, the 
zealous opponent of the Copernican system, laid the founda- 
tion for the discovery of those eternal laws of the planetar} 
movements which prepared imperishable renown for the name 
of Kepler, and which, interpreted by Newton, and proved to 
be theoretically and necessarily true, have been transferred 
into the bright and glorious domain of thought as the intellect- 
ual recognition of nature. It has been ingeniously said, al- 
though, perhaps, with too feeble an estimate of the free and 
independent spirit which created the theory of gravitation, 
that " Kepler wrote a code of laws, and Newton the spirit of 
those laws.*" 

ed mathematically the assumption of the retrogressions of the planets 
under the idea of a revolution round the sun, without adding any thing 
definite and general as to the truth of this assumption. The difference 
of the Apollonian system, described by Gassendi, from that of Tycho, 
would only be, that the latter likewise explained the inequalities of the 
movements. The remark of Robert Small, that the idea which forms 
the basis of Tycho's system was by no means unfamiliar to the mind 
of Copernicus, but had rather served him as a point of transition to his 
own system, appears to me well founded." 

* Schubert, Astronomie, th. i., s. 124. In the Philosophy of the In' 
ductive Sciences, vol. ii., p. 282, Whewell, in his Inductive Table of 
Astronomy, has given an exceedingly good and complete view of the 
Vol. II.— -O 



314 COSMOS. ' 

The figurative and poetical myths of the Pythagorean and 
Platonic pictures of the universe, changeable as the fancy from 
which they emanated * may still be traced partially reflected 
in Kepler ; but while they warmed and cheered his often sad- 
dened spirit, they never turned him aside from his earnest 
course, the goal of which he reached in the memorable night 
of the 15th of May, 1618, twelve years before his death.1 
Copernicus had furnished a satisfactory explanation of the ap- 

astronomical contemplation of the structure of the universe, from thd 
earliest ages to Newton's system of gravitation. 

* Plato, in the Phcedrvs, adopts the system of PhilolaUs, but in the 
Timceus, that accoi'ding to which the earth is immovable in the center;, 
and which was subsequently called the Hipparchian or the Ptolemaic 
(Bockh, De Platonico systemate ca-lestium globonim, et de vera indole as 
tronomia Fhilolaicce, p. xxvi.-xxxii. ; the same author in the Philolaos, 
s. 104-108. Cora[)are, also, Fries, Geschichte der Philosophie, bd. i., s 
325-347, with Martin's Etudes sur Tirn6e, t. ii., p. 64-92.) The astro 
nomical vision, in which the structm*e of the universe is shrouded, al 
the end of the Book of tM Republic, reminds us at once of the intercal 
ated spherical systems of the planets, and of the concord of tones, •* the 
voices of the Syrens moving in concert with the revolving spheres." 
(See, on the discovery of the true system of the universe, the fine and 
comprehensive work of Apelt, Epochen der Gesch. der Menscheit, bd. i., 
1845, s. 205-305, and 379-445.) 

t Kepler, Harmonices Mundi, libri quinque, 1619, p. 189. "On the 
8th of March, 1618, it occurred to Kepler, after many unsuccessful at 
tempts, to compare the squares of the times of revolution of the planets 
with the cubes of the mean distances ; but he made an error in his cal- 
culations, and rejected this idea. On the 15th of May, 1618, he again 
reverted to it, and calculated correctly. The third law of Kepler was 
now discovered." This discovery, and those related to it, coincide 
with the unhappy period when this great man, who had been exposed 
from early childhood to the hai'dest blows of fate, was striving to save 
from the torture and the stake his mother, who, at the age of seventy 
years, in a trial for witchcraft, which lasted six years, had been accus- 
ed of poison-mixing, inability of shedding tears, and of sorcery. The 
suspicion was increased from the circumstance that her own son, the 
wicked Christopher Kepler, a worker in tin, was her accuser, and that 
she had been brought up by an aunt, who was burned at Weil as a 
witch. See an exceedingly interesting work, but little known in for- 
eign countries, drawn from newly-discovered manuscripts by Baron von 
Breitschwert, entitled " Jokann Kepplerh Leben und Wirken,'^ 1831, s. 
12, 97-147, and 196. According to this work, Kepler, who in German 
letters always signed his name Keppler, was not born on the 21st of 
December, 1571, in the imperial town of Weil, as is usually supposed, 
but on the 27th of December, 1571, in the village of Magstadt, in WUr- 
temberg. It is uncertain whether Copernicus was born on the 19th of 
January, 1472, or on the 19th of February, 1473, as Mostlin asserts, or 
(according to Czynski) on the 12th of February of the same year. Tho 
year of Columbus's birth was long undetermined within pin-^trer yr&gt;ar», 
Ramusio places it in 1430, Bemaldez, the friend oi tho discovor©r« is 
1436, and the celebrated historian Munoz in 144S. 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 815 

parent revolution of the heaven of the fixed stars by the di- 
urnal rotation of the earth round its axis ; and by its annual 
movement round the sun he had aflbrded an equally perfect 
solution of the most striking movements of the planets (their 
stationary conditions and their retrogressions), and thus given 
the true reason of the so-called second inequality of the 'plan- 
ets. ^\iQ first inequality, or the unequal movement of the 
planets in their orbits, he left unexplained. True to the an- 
cient Pythagorean principle of the perfectibility inherent in 
ci:rcular movements, Copernicus thought that he required for 
his structure of the universe some of the epicycles of Apollo- 
nius of Perga, besides the eccentric circles having a vacuum 
in their center. However bold was the path adventured on. 
the human mind could not at once emancipate itself from all 
earlier views. 

The equal distance at .which the stars remained, while thft 
whole vault of heaven seemed to move from east to west, had 
led to the idea of a firmament and a solid crystal sphere, in 
which Anaximenes (who was probably not much later than 
Pythagoras) had conjectured that the stars were riveted liko 
nails.* Geminus of Rhodes, the cotemporary of Cicero, doubt- 
ed whether the constellations lay in one uniform plane, beina; 
of opinion that some were higher and others lower than the 
rest. The idea formed of the heaven of the fixed stars was 
extended to the planets, and thus arose the theory of the ec- 
centric intercalated spheres of Eudoxus and Mensechmus, and 
of Aristotle, who was the inventor o^ retrograde spheres. The 
theory of epicycles — a construction which adapted itself most 
readily to the representation and calculation of the planetary 
movements — was, a century afterward, made by the acute 
mind of ApoUonius to supersede solid spheres. However much 
I may incline to mere ideal abstraction, I here refrain from 
attempting to decide historically whether, as Ideler believes, 
it was not until after the establishment of the Alexandrian 
Museum that " a free movement of the planets in space was 
regarded as possible," or whether, before that period, the in- 
tercalated transparent spheres (of which there were twenty- 
seven according to Eudoxus, and fifty-five according to Aris- 
totle), as well as the epicycles which passed from Hipparchus 
and Ptolemy to the Middle Ages, were regarded generally not 

* Plat., De plac. Philos., ii., 14; Aristot., MeteoroL, xi., 8 De Coelo^ 
ii., 8. On the theory of spheres generally, and on the r* *'-ograding 
spheres of Aristotle in particular, see Ideler's Vorlcsung.ube,- Eudoxu*, 
\8fi8, B. 49-60. 



S|6 COSMOS. 

as solid bodies of material thickness, but merely as ideal ab- 
stractions. It is more certain that in the middle of the six- 
teenth century, when the theory of the seventy-seven homo- 
centric spheres of the learned vi^riter, Girolamo Fracastoro, 
found general approval ; and when, at a later period, the op- 
ponents of Copernicus sought all means of upholding the Ptol- 
emaic system, the idea of the existence of so/zd! spheres, circles, 
and epicycles, which was especially favored by the Fathers of 
the Church, was still very widely diffused. Tycho Brahe ex- 
pressly bodsts that his considerations on the orbits of comets 
first proved the impossibility of solid spheres, and thus destroy- 
ed the artificial fabrics. He filled the free space of heaven 
with air, and even believed that the resisting medium, when 
disturbed by the revolving heavenly bodies, might generate 
tones. The unimaginative Rothmann believed it necessary 
to refute this renewed Pythagorean myth of celestial harmony. 
Kepler's great discovery that all the planets move round 
the sun in ellipses, and that the sun lies in one of the foci of 
these ellipses, at length freed the original Copernican system 
from eccentric circles and all epicycles.*' The planetary struc- 
ture of the world now appeared objectively, and as it were 
architecturally, in its simple grandeur ; but it remained for 
Isaac Newton to disclose the play and connection of the intern- 
al forces which animate and preserve the system of the uni- 
verse. We have already often remarked, in the history of the 
gradual development of human knowledge, that important but 
apparently accidental discoveries, and the simultaneous ap- 
pearance of many great minds, are crowded together in a short 
period of time ; and we find this phenomenon most strikingly 
manifested in the first ten years of the seventeenth century ; 
for Tycho Brahe (the founder of modern astronomical calcula- 
tions), Kepler, Galileo, and Lord Bacon, were cotemporaries. 
All these, with the exception of Tycho Brahe, were enabled, 
in the prime of life, to benefit by the labors of Descartes and 
Fermat. The elements of Bacon's Instauratio Magna ap- 
peared in the English language in 1605, fifteen years before 

* A better insight into the free movement of bodies, and into the in- 
dependence of the direction once given to the earth's axis, and into the 
rotatory and progressive movement of the terrestrial planet in its orbit, 
has freed the original system of Copernicus from the assumption of a 
declination movement, or a so-called third movement of the earth (Z&gt;e 
Revolut. Orb. CcEl.,\\h. i., cap. 11, triplex motus telluris). The parallel- 
ism of the earth's axis is maintained in the annual revolufion round the 
sun, in conformity vv^ith the law^ of inertia, withe ut the application of a 
correcting epicycle 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 317 

the Novum Organon. The invention of the telescope, and 
the greatest discoveries in physical astronomy (viz., Jupiter's 
satellites, the sun's spots, the phases of Venus, and the remark- 
able form of Saturn), fall between the years 1609 and 1G12. 
Kepler's speculations on the elliptic orbit of Mars=&gt;^ were be- 
gan in 1601, and gave occasion, eight years after, to the com- 
pletion of the work entitled Astronomia nova sen Physica ce- 
lestis. " By the study of the orbit of Mars," writes Kepler, 
" we must either arrive at a knowledge of the secrets of astron- 
omy, or forever remain ignorant of them. I have succeeded, by 
untiring and continued labor, in subjecting the inequalities of 
the movement of Mars to a natural law." The generaliza- 
tion of the same idea led the highly-gifted mind of Kepler to 
the great cosmical truths and presentiments which, ten years 
later, he published in his work entitled Harmonices Mundi 
libri quinque. " I believe," he well observes in a letter to 
the Danish astronomer Longomontanus, " that astronomy and 
physics are so intimately associated together, that neither can 
be perfected without the other," The results of his researches 
on the structure of the eye and the theory of vision appeared 
in 1604 in the Paralipomena ad Vitellionem, and in I611t 
in the Dioptrica. Thus were the knowledge of the most im- 
portant objects in the perceptive world and in the regions of 
space, and the mode of apprehending these objects by means 
of new discoveries, alike rapidly increased in the short period 
of the first ten or twelve years of a century which began with 
Galileo and Kepler, and closed with Newton and Leibnitz. 

The accidental discovery of the power of the telescope to 
penetrate through space originated in Holland, probably in the 
closing part of the year 1608. From the most recent investi- 
gations it would appear that this great discovery may be 
claimed by Hans Lippershey, a native of Wesel and a spec- 
tacle maker at Middleburg ; by Jacob Adriaansz, surnamed 
Metius, who is said also to have made burning glasses of ice ; 
and by Zacharias Jansen.J The first-named is always called 

* Delambre, Hist, de V Antronomie Ancienne. t. ii., p. 381. 

t See Sir David Brewster's judgment on Kepler's optical works, in 
the " Martyrs of Science,'" 1846, p. 179-182. (Compare Wilde, Gesch. 
der Optik, 1838. th. i., s. 182-210.) If the law of the refraction of the 
rays of light belong to Willebrord Snellius, pi'ofessor at Leyden (1626); 
who left it behind him buried in his papers, the publication of the law 
in a trigonometrical form Wcis, on the other hand, first made by Des- 
cartes. See Brewster, in the North BriUsh Review, vol. vii., p 207 % 
Wilde, Gesch. der Optik, th. i., s. 227. 

i Compare two excellent treatises on the discovery of the telescope 
by Professor Moll, of Utrecht, in the Journal of the Rcyal Institution^ 



318 COSMOS. 

Laprey in the important letter of the Dutch embassador Bo- 
reei to the physician Borelli, the author of the treatise De vero 

1831, vol. i., p. 319 ; and by Wilde, of Berlin, in his Gesch. der Optik, 
1838, th. i., s. 138-172. The work referred to, and written in the 
Dutch language, is entitled " Geschiedkvndig Onderzoek naar de eerste 
Uitfinders der Vernkykers, uit de Aunekenningen van wyle den Hoogl. 
van Swinden zamengesteld door, G. Moll," Amsterdam, 1831. Albers 
has given an extract from this interesting treatise in Schumacher's Jahr- 
buck fiir 1843, s. 56-65. The optical instruments with which Jan- 
seu furnished Prince Maurice of Nassau, and the Archduke Albert (the 
latter gave his to Cornelius Drebbel), were (as is shown by the letter 
of the embassador Boreel, who, when a child, had been often in the 
house of Jansen, the spectacle maker, and who subsequently saw the in- 
struments iu the shop) microscopes eighteen inches in length, " through 
which small objects were wonderfully magnified when one looked 
down at them from above." The confusion between the microscope 
and the telescope has rendered the histtjry of the invention of both in- 
struments obscure. The letter of Boreel (Paris, 1655), above alluded 
to, notwithstanding the authority of Tiraboschi, renders it improbable 
that the first invention of the compound microscope belonged to Gali- 
leo. Compare, on this obscure history of optical instruments, Vicenzio 
Aiitinori, in the Saggi di Naturali Esperienze fatte nelV Accademia del 
Cimento, 1841, p. 22-26. Even Huygens, who was bom scarcely twen- 
ty-five years after the conjectural date of the invention of the telescope, 
does not venture to decide with certainty on the name of the first in 
ventor {Opera Reliqna, 1728, vol. ii., p. 125). According to the re- 
searches made in public archives by Van S widen and Mole, Lippershey 
was not only in possession of a telescope made by himself as early as 
the 2d of October, 16U8, but the French embassador at the Hague, Pres- 
ident Jeauuin, wrote, on the 28th of December of the same year, to 
Sully, " that he was in treaty wnth the Middleburg spectacle maker for 
a telescope, which he wished to send to the king, Henry IV." Simon 
Maiius (Mayor of Genzenhausen, one of the discoverers of Jupiter's 
satellites) even relates that a telescope was offered for sale in the au 
tumn of 1608, at Frankfort-on-Maine, by a Belgian, to his friend Fuchs 
of Bimbach, Privy Counselor of the Margrave of Ansbach. Telescopes 
were made in London in February, 1610, therefore a year after Galileo 
had completed his own. (Rigaud, On Hariofs Papers, 1833, p. 23, 26, 
and 46.) They were at first called cylinders. Porta, the inventor of 
the camera obsctira, like Francastero, the cotemporary of Columbus, 
Copernicus and Cardanus, at earlier periods, had merely spoken of the 
possibility " of seeing all things larger and nearer" by means of convex 
and concave glasses being placed on each other (duo specilla ocularia 
alterura alteri superposita) ; but we can not ascribe the invention of 
the telescope to them (Tiraboschi, Storia della Letter., ital., t. xi., p 
467; Wilde, Gesch. der Optik, th. i., s. 121). Spectacles had been 
known in Haarlem since the beginning of the fourteenth century; and 
an epitaph in the church of Maria Maggiore, at Florence, names Salvi- 
no degli Armati, who died in 1317, as the inventor (inventore degli oc- 
chiali). Some apparently authentic notices of the use of spectacles by 
aged persons are to be met with as early as 1299 and 1305: The pas- 
sages of Roger Bacon refer to the magnifying power of spheincal seg. 
ments of glass. See Wilde, Gesch. der Optik, th. i., s. 93-96 ; and anit, 
p. 245. 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 319 

telescojni inventore (1655). If the claim of priority be de- 
termined by the periods at which offers were made to the 
General States, the honor belongs to Hans Lippershey ; for, on 
the 2d of October, 1608, he offered to the government three 
instruments " by which one might see objects at a distance." 
The offer of Metius was made on the 17th of October of the 
same year ; but he expressly says " that he has already, for 
two years, constructed similar instruments, through industry 
and thought." Zacharias Jansen (who, like Lippershey, was 
a spectacle maker at Middleburg) invented, in conjunction 
with his father Hans Jansen, toward the end of the sixteenth 
century, and probably after 1590, the ccmipoimd niicros.co^ye^ 
the eye-piece of which is a concave lens ; but, as we learn 
from the embassador Boreel, it was not until 1610 that he 
discovered the telescope, which he and his friends directed to 
distant terrestrial, but not toward celestial objects. The in- 
fluence which has been exercised by the microscope in giving 
us a more profound knowledge of the conformation and move- 
ment of the separate parts of all organic bodies, and by the 
telescope in suddenly opening to us the regions of space, has 
been so immeasurably great, that it seems requisite to enter 
somewhat circumstantially into the history of these discov 
eries. 

When, in May, 1609, the news of the discovery made in 
Holland of telescopic vision reached Venice, Galileo, who was 
accidentally there, conjectured at once what must be the es* 
sential points in the construction of a telescope, and imme- 
diately completed one for himself at Padua.* This instrument 

* The above-named physician and mathematician of the Margravate 
of Ansbach, Simon Marias, after receiving a description of the action 
of a Dutch telescope, is likewise believed to have constructed one him- 
self as early as the year 1608. On Galileo's earliest observation of tha 
mountainous regions iu the moon, to which I have referred in the text, 
compare Nelli, Vita di Galilei, vol. i., p. 200-206 ; Galilei, Opere, 1744, 
t. ii., p. 60, 403, and Lettera al Padre Cristoforo Grienberger, in mate' 
ria delle MotiUwsita della Lnna, p. 409-424. Galileo found in the moon 
some circular districts, surrounded on all sides by mountains similar to 
the form of Bohemia. " Eundem facit aspectum Luna? locus quidam, 
ac faceret in terris regio consimilis Boemite, si monlibus altissimis, inque 
peripheriam perfecti circuli dispositis occluderetur undique" (t. ii., p. 
8). The measurements of the mountains were made by the method 
of the tangents of the solar ray. Galileo, as Helvetius did still later, 
measured the distance of the summit of the mountains from the bound 
ary of the illuminated portion, at the moment when the mountain sum- 
mit was first struck by the solar ray. I find no observation of the 
lengths of the shadows of the mountains. He found the summits "in- 
•irca miglia quattro" in height, and " much higher tlmn the mountains 



320 



COSMOS. 



he first directed toward the mountainous parts of the moon, 
and showed how their summits might be measured, while he, 
hke Leonardo da Vinci and MostUn, ascribed the ash-colored 
light of the moon to the reflection of solar light from the earth 
to the moon. He observed with low magnifying powers the 
group of the Pleiades, the starry cluster in Cancer, the. Milky 
Way, and the group of stars in the head of Orion. Then fol- 
lowed, in quick succession, the great discoveries of the four 
satellites of Jupiter, the two handles of Saturn (his indistinct- 
ly-seen rings, the form of which was not recognized), the solar 
spots, and crescent shape of Venus. 

The moons of Jupiter, the first of all the secondary planets 
discovered by the telescope, were first seen, almost simulta 
neously and wholly independently, on the 29th of December, 
1609, by Simon Marius at Ansbach, and on the 7th of Jan- 
uary, 1610, by Gahleo at Padua. In the pubhcation of this 
discovery, Galileo, by the Nuncms Siderius (1610), preced- 
ed the Miindus Jovialis (1614) of Simon Marius,* who had 

on our earth." The comparison is remarkable, since, according to Ric- 
cioli, very exaggerated ideas of the height oiour mountains were then 
entertained, and one of the principal or most celebrated of these ele 
vations, the Peak of TeneritFe, was first measured trigonometrically, 
with some degree of exactness, by Feuillee, in 1724. Galileo, like all 
other observers up to the close of the eighteenth century, believed in 
the existence of many seas and of a lunar atmosphere. 

* I here again find occasion {Cosmos, vol. i., p. 185) to refer to the 
proposition laid down by Arago : " The only rational and just method 
of writing the history of science is to base it exclusively on works, the 
date of whose publication is certain. All beyond this must be confused 
and obscure." The singularly-delayed publication of the Frdnkische 
Kalender or Practica (1612), and of the astronomically important mem- 
oir entitled '^ Mundus Jovialis anno 1609 delectus ope perspicilli Bel 
gici (Febniary, 1614)," may indeed have given occasion to the suspicion 
that Marius had drawn his materials from the Nuncius Sidereiis of Gal- 
ileo, the dedication of which is dated March, 1610, or even from ear- 
lier manuscript communications. Galileo, irritated by the still remem- 
bered lawsuit against Balthasar Capra, a pupil of Marius, calls him the 
usurper of the system of Jupiter, " Usurpatore del sistema di Giove," 
and he even accuses tiie heretical Protestant astronomer of Gunzen- 
hausen of having founded his apparently earlier observation on a con- 
fusion between the calendars. " Tace il Mario di far cauto il lettore, 
come esseudo egli separate della chiesa nostra, ne avendo accettato 
Temendatione Gregoriana, il giorno 7 di gennaio del 1610, di noi Cat- 
tolici (the day on which Galileo discovered the satellites) e Tistesso, 
che il di 28 di Deceml)re del 1609, di lore eretici, e questa 6 tutta la 
precedenza delle sue finte osservalioni" (Vertui-i, Memoire e Lettere di 
O. Galilei, 1818, Part i., p. 279 ; and Delambre, Hist, de V Astr. Mod., 
t. i., p. 696). According to a letter wntten by Galileo in 1614 to the 
Accademia di Lined, it would appear that he attempted, somewhat un- 
philosophically, to direct his complaint against Marius to the Marchese 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 321 

proposed to give to Jupiter's satellites the names of Sidera 
Brandenburgica, while Galileo preferred the names Sidera 
Cosmica or Medicea, of which the latter found most approv- 
al at the court of Florence. This collective appellation did 
not satisfy the yearnings of flattery. Instead of designating 
the satellites by numbers, as we do at present, Marius had 
named them lo, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto ; but for 
these mythological designations Galileo's nomenclature sub- 
stituted the family names of the ruling house of Medici — 
Catharina, Maria, Cosimo the elder, and Cosimo the younger. 
The knowledge of Jupiter's satellite-system, and of the 
phases of Venus, has exercised the most marked influence on 
the establishment and general difiusion of the Copernican sys- 
tem. The little world of Jupiter {Mimdus Jovialis) present 
ed to the intellectual contemplation of men a perfect image 
of the large planetary and solar systems. It was recognized 
that the secondary planets obeyed the laws discovered by Kep 
ler ; and it was now first observed that the squares of their 

di Brandeburgo. On the whole, however, Galileo continued well dis- 
posed toward the German astronomers. He writes, in March, 1611, 
** Gli ingegni singolari, che in gran numero fioriscono neli' Alemagna, 
mi hanno lungo tempo tenuto in desiderio di vederla" (^Opere, t. ii., p. 
44). It has always appeared very remarkable to me, that if Kepler, 
in a conversation with Marius, was playfully adduced as a sponsor for 
these mythological designations of lo and Callisto, there should be no 
mention of his countryman either in the Commentary published in 
Prague, in April, IGIO, to the Nuncius Siderins, nuper ad mortales a 
GaLilceo missut, or in his letters to Galileo, or in those addressed to the 
Emperor Rudolph in the autumn of the same year ; but that, on the 
contrary, Kepler should every where speak of " the glorious discovery 
of the Medicean stars by Galileo." In publishing his own observations 
on the satellites, from the 4th to the 9th of September, 1610, he gives 
to a little memoir which appeared at Frankfort in 1611, the title, ^^ Kep- 
leri Narratio de observalis a se quatuor Jovis satellitibus erronibus quos 
GalilcEus Malhematicus Florentinns jure inventionis Medicea Sidera nun- 
cnpavit." A letter from Prague, October 25, 1610, addressed to Galileo, 
concludes with the words " nerainem habes, quera metuas amulum." 
Compare Venturi, Part i., p. 100, 117, 139, 144, and 149. Misled by a 
mistake, and after a very careless examination of the valuable manu- 
scripts preserved at Petworth, the seat of Loid Egremoiit, Baron von 
Zach asserted that the distinguished astronomer and Virginian traveler, 
Thomas Hariot, had discovered the satellites of Jupiter simultaneous- 
ly with, or even earlier than Galileo. A more careful examination of 
Harlot's manuscripts, by Rigaud, has shovv^n that his observations be- 
gan, not on the 16th of .January, but only on the 17th of October, 1610, 
nine months after Galileo and Marius. (Compare Zach, Corr. Astron.j 
vol. vii., p. 105. Rigaud, Account of Harriot's Astron. Papers, Oxf., 
1833, p. 37 ; Brewster, Martyrs of Science, 1846, p. 32.) The earliest 
original observations of Jupiter's satellites made by Galileo and bii 
pupil Senieri were only discovered two years ago. 

O 2 



32SI COSMOS. 

periodic times were as the cubes of the mean distances of the 
satellites from the primary planets. It was this which led 
Kepler, in the Hannonices Mundi, to state, with the firm 
confidence and security of a German spirit of philosophical 
independence, to those whose opinions bore sway beyond the 
Alps ; "eighty jj'ears have elapsed,* during which the doctrines 
of Copernicus, regarding the movement of the earth, and the 
immobility of the sun, have been promulgated without hin- 
derance, because it is deemed allowable to dispute concerning 
natural things, and to elucidate the works of God ; and now 
that new testimony is discovered in proof of the truth of those 
doctrines — testimony which was not known to the spiritual 
judges — ye would prohibit the promulgation of the true sys- 
tem of the structure of the universe I" Such a prohibition — 
a consequence of the old contest between natural science and 
the Church — Kepler had early encountered in Protestant Ger- 
many.! 

The discovery of Jupiter's satellites marks an ever-memo 
rable epoch in the history and the vicissitudes of astronomy.^ 
The occultations of the satellites, or their entrance into Jupiter's 
shadow, led to a knowledge of the velocity of light (1675), 
and, through this knowledge, to the explanation of the aber- 
ration-ellipse of the fixed stars (1727), in which the great orbit 
of the earth, in its annual course round the sun, is, as it were, 
reflected on the vault of heaven. These discoveries of Rbmer 
and Bradley have been justly termed " the keystone of the 
Copernican system," the perceptible evidence of the transla- 
tory motion of the earth. 

Galileo had also early perceived (September, 1612) the im- 
portance of the occultations of Jupiter's sateUites for geograph- 
ical determinations of longitude on land. He proposed this 
method, first to the Spanish court in 1616, and afterward to 
the States-General of Holland, with a view of its being ap- 
plied to nautical purposes, § little aware, as it would appear, 

* It should be seventy-three years; for the prohibition of theCopei-- 
uican system by the Congregation of the Index was promulgated on 
the 5th of March, 1616. 

t Freiherr von Breitschwert, Keppler's Leben, s. 36. 

X Sir .John Herschel, Astron., s. 465. 

^ Galilei, Opere, t. ii. {LongiUidine per via de' Pianeti Medicei), p. 
435-506; Nelli, Vita, vol. ii., p. 656-688; Venturi, Memorie e I ettere 
di G. Galilei, Part i., p. 177. As early as 1612, or scai-cely tw^ years 
after tlie discovery of Jupiter's satellites, Galileo boasted, somewhat 
prematurely indeed, of having completed tables of those secondary sat- 
ellites " to within 1' of time." A long diplomatic correspondence was 
ferried on with the Spanish embassador in 1616, and with the Dutch 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 323 

of the insuperable difficulties presented to its practical appli- 
cation on the unstable element. He wished to go himself, or 
to send his son Vicenzio, to Spain, with a hundred telescopes, 
which he would prepare. He required as a recompense " una 
croce di San Jago," and an annual payment of 4000 scudi, a 
Binall sum, he says, consideruig that hopes had been given to 
him, in the house of Cardinal Borgia, of receiving 6000 ducats 
annually. 

The discovery of the secondary planets of Jupiter was soon 
followed by the observations of the so-called triple form of 
Saturn as a planeta tergeiimiu?,. As early as November, 
1610, Galileo informed Kepler that " Saturn consisted of three 
stars, which were in mutual contact with one another." Ixv 
this observation lay the germ of the discovery of Saturn's ring. 
Hevelius, in 1656, described the variations in its form, the un- 
equal opening of the handles (ansse), and their occasional total 
disappearance. The merit of having given a scientific expla- 
nation of all the phenomena of Saturn's ring belongs, how- 
ever, to the acute observer Huygens, who, in 1655, in accord- 
ance with the suspicious custom of the age, and like Galileo, 
concealed his discovery in an anagram of eighty-eight letters. 
Doxninicus Cassini was the first who observed the black stripe 
on the ring, and in 1684 he recognized that it is divided into 
at least two concentric rings. I have here collected together 
what has been learned during a century regarding the most 
wonderful and least anticipated of all the forms occurring in 
the heavenly regions — a form which has led to ingenious con- 
jectures regarding the original mode of formation of the sec- 
ondary and primary planets. 

embassador in 1636, but without leading to the desired object. The 
telescopes were to magnify from forty to fifty times. In order more 
easily to find the satellites when the ship is in motion, and (as he be- 
lieved) to keep them in the field, he invented, in 1617 (Nelli, vol. ii., 
p. 663), the binocular telescope, which has generally been ascribed to 
the Capucine monk Schyrleus de Rheita, who had much experience in 
optical matters, and who endeavored to construct telescopes magnifying 
four thousand times. Galileo made experiments with his binocular 
(which he also called a celatone or testiera) in the harbor of Leghorn, 
while the ship was violently moved by a strong wind. He also caused 
a contrivance to be prepared in the arsenal at Pisa, by which the ob- 
server of the satellites might be protected from all motion, by seating 
himself in a kind of boat, floating in another boat filled with water or 
with oil {hcltera al Picchena de^ 22 Marzo, 1617 ; Nelli, Vita, vol. i., p. 



£31 ; Gulilei, Opere, t. ii., p. 473 ; Lettera a Lorenzo Realio del 5 Oiug' 
no, 1637). The proof which Galileo {Opere, t. ii., p. 454) brought for- 
ward of the advantage to the naval service of his method over Morin'i 
method of lunar distances is veiy striking. 



324 COSMOS. 

The spots upon the sun were first observed thiough tele- 
scopes by Johaiin Fabricius of" East Friesland, and by Galileo 
(at Padua or Venice, as is asserted). In the publication of 
the discovery, in June, 161 1, Fabricius incontestably preceded 
Galileo by one year, since his first letter to the burgomaster, 
Marcus Welser, is dated the 4th of May, 1612. The earliest 
observations of Fabricius were made, according to Arago's 
careful researches, in March, 1611,* and, according to Sir 
David Brewster, even as early as toward the close of the year 
1610 : while Christopher Scheiner did not carry his own ob- 
servations back to an earlier period than April, 1611, and it 
is probable that he did not seriously occupy himself with the 
solar spots until October of the same year. Concerning Gal- 
ileo we possess only very obscure and discrepant data on this 
subject. It is probable that he recognized the solar spots in 
April, 1611, for he showed them publicly at Rome in Cardi- 
nal Bandini's garden on the Quirinal, in the months of April 
and May of that year. Hariot, to whom Baron Zach ascribes 
the discovery of the sun's spots (16th of January, 1610), cer- 
tainly saw three of them on the 8th of December, 1610, and 
noted them down in a register of observations ; but he was 
ignorant that they were solar spots ; thus, too, Flamstead, on 
the 23d of December, 1690, and Tobias Mayer, on the 25th 
of September, 1756, did not recognize Uranus as a planet 
when it passed across the field of their telescope. Hariot first 
observed the solar spots on the 1st of December, 1611, five 
months, therefore, after Fabricius had published his discovery. 
Galileo had made the observation that the solar spots, " many 
of which are larger than the Mediterranean, or even than 
Africa and Asia," form a definite zone on the sun's disk. He 
occasionally noticed the same spots return, and he was con- 
vinced that they belonged to the sun itself. Their differences 
of dimension in the center of the sun, and when they disap- 
peared on the sun's edge, especially attracted his attention, 

* See Arago, in the Annuaire for 1842, p. 460-476 (^Dicouvertes des 
taches Solaires et de la Rotation du Soleil). Brewster {Martyrs of 
Science, p. 36 and 39) places the first observation of Galileo in October 
or November, 1610. Compare Nelli, Vita,\o\. i., p. 324-384 ; Galilei, 
Opere, t. i., p. lix. ; t. ii., p. 85-200 ; t. iv., p. 53. On Harriot's observ- 
ations, see Rigaud,p. 32 and 38. The Jesuit Scheiner, who was sum- 
moned from Gratz to Rome, has been accused of striving to revenge 
himself on Galileo, on account of the literary contest regarding the dis- 
covery of the solar spots, by getting it whispered to Pope Urban VIII., 
through another Jesuit, Grassi, that he (the pope), in the Dialoghidelle 
Scienze Nuove, was I'epresented as the foolish and ignorant Simplicie 
(Nelli, vol. ii., p. 515) 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTI iL SPACES. 32r» 

but Still I find nothing in his second remarkable letter of the 
14th of August, 1612, to Marcus Welser, that would indicate 
his having observed an inequality in the ash-colored margin 
on both sides of the black nucleus when approaching the 
sun's edge (Alexander Wilson's accurate observation in 1773). 
The Canon Tarde in 1620, and Malapertus in 1633,. ascribed 
all obs.' urations of the sun to small cnsmical bodies revolving 
around it and intercepting its hght, and named the Bourbon 
and Austrian stars* [Borbonia et Austriaca Sidera). Fa- 
bricius recognized, like Galileo, that the spots belonged to the 
sun itself ;t he also noticed that the spots he had seen vanish 
all reappear ; and the observation of these phenomena taught 
him the rotation of the sun, which had already been conject- 
ured by Kepler before the discovery of the solar spots. The 
most accurate determinations of the period of rotation were, 
however, made in 1630, by the diligent Scheiner. Since the 
strongest light ever produced by man, Drummond's incan- 
descent lime-ball, appears inky black when thrown on the 
Bun's disk, we can not wonder that Galileo, who undoubtedly 
first described the great solar faculce, should have regarded 
the light of the nucleus of the sun's spots as more intense than 
that of the full moon, or the atmosphere near the sun's disk.$ 
Fanciful conjectures regarding the many envelopes of air, 
clouds, and light, which surround the black, earth-like nucleus 
of the sun, may be found in the writings of Cardinal Nicholas 
of Cusa as early as the middle of the fifteenth century.^ 

To close our consideration of the cycle of remarkable dis- 
coveries, which scarcely comprised two years, and in which the 
great and undying name of the Florentine shines pre-eminent, 
it still remains for us to notice the observation of the phases 
of Venus. In February, 1610, Galileo observed the crescentic 
form of this planet, and on the 11th of December, 1610, in 
accordance with a practice already alluded to, he concealed 
this important discovery in an anagram, of which Kepler 
makes mention in the preface to his Dioptrica. We learn 

* Delambre, Hist, de V Astronomie Moderne, t. i., p. 690. 

t The same opinion is expressed in Galileo's Letters to Prince Cesi 
(May 25, 1612) ; Venturi, Part i., p. 172. 

t See some ingenious and interesting considerations on this subject 
by Arago, in the Annuaire poiir Van 1842, p. 481-488. Sir John Her- 
schel, in his Astronomy, $ 334, speaks of the experiments with Drum- 
mond's light projected on the sun's disk. 

$ Giordano Bruno und Nic. von Cusa vcrglicTien, von .T. Clemens, 
1847, 8. 101. On the phases of Venus, see GaUlei, Opere^ t. ii., p. 5^ 
and Nelli, Vita, vol. i., p. 213-215. 



326 COSMOS. 

also, from a letter of his to Benedetto Castelli (30th of De» 
cember, 1610), that he believed, notwithstanding- the low mag- 
nifyi« g power of his telescope, that he could recognize changes 
in the illumined disk of Mars. The discovery of the moon- 
like or crescent shape of Venus was the triumph of the Coper 
nican system. The founder of that system could scarcely fail 
to recognize the necessity of the existence of these phases ; 
and we find that he discusses circumstantially, in the tenth 
chapter of his first book, the doubts which the more modern 
adherents of the Platonic opinions advance against the Ptole- 
maic system on account of these phases. But, in the develop- 
ment of his own system, he does not speak expressly of the 
phases of Venus, as is stated by Thomas Smith in his Optics. 
The enlargement of cosmical knowledge, whose description 
can not, unhappily, be wholly separated from unpleasant dis- 
sensions regarding the right of priority to discoveries, excited, 
like all that refers to physical astronomy, more general atten- 
tion, from the fact that several great discoveries in the heavens 
had aroused the attention of the public mass at the respective 
periods of thirty-six, eight, and four years prior to the invention 
of the telescope in 1608, viz., the sudden apparition and dis- 
appearance of three new stars, one in Cassiopeia in 1572, an- 
other in the constellation of the Swan in 1600, and the third 
m the foot of Ophiuchus in 1604. All these stars were bright- 
er than those of the first magnitude, and the one observed by 
Kepler in the Swan continued to shine in the heavens for 
twenty-one years, throughout the whole period of Galileo's dis- 
coveries. Three centuries and a half have now nearly passed 
since then, but no new star of the first or second magnitude 
has appeared ; for the remarkable event witnessed by Sir 
John Herschel in the southern hemisphere (in 1837)* was a 
great increase in the intensity of the fight of a long-known star 
of the second magnitude (?; Argo), which had not until then 
been recognized as variable. The writings of Kepler, and our 
own experience of the effect produced by the appearance of 
comets visible to the naked eye, will teach us to understand 
how powerfully the appearance of new stars, between the 
years 1572 and 1604, must have arrested attention, increased 
the general interest in astronomical discoveries, and excited 
the minds of men to the combination of imaginative conject- 
ures. Thus, too, terrestrial natural events, as earthquakes in 
regions where they have been but seldom experienced ; the 
eruption of volcanoes that had long remained inactive ; the 
* Compare Cosmos, vol. i., p. 153 and 353. 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 327 

sounds of aerolites traversing our atmosphere and becoming 
ignited within its confines, impart a new stimulus, for a cer- 
tain time, to the general interest in problems, which appear 
to the people at large even more mysterious than to the dog- 
matizing physicist. 

My reason for more particularly naming Kepler in these 
remarks on the influence of direct sensuous contemplation has 
been to point out how, in this great and highly»^ifted man, a 
taste for imaginative combinations was combined with a re- 
markable talent for observation, an earnest and severe meth- 
od of induction, a courageous and almost unparalleled perse- 
verance in calculation, and a mathematical profoundness of 
mind, which,, revealed in his Stereometria Dolioi'um, exer- 
cised a happy influence on Format, and, through him, on the 
invention of the theory of the infinitesimal calculus.^ A man 
endowed with such a mind was pre-eminently qualified by 
the richness and mobility of his ideas,! and by the bold cos- 
mical conjectures which he advanced, to animate and aug- 
ment the movement which led the seventeenth century unin- 
terruptedly forward to the exalted object presented in an ex- 
tended contemplation of the universe. 

The many comets visible to the naked eye from 1577 to 
the appearance of Halley's comet in 1607 (eight in number), 
and the sudden apparition already alluded to of three stars 
almost at the same period, gave rise to speculations on the 
origin of these heavenly bodies from a cosmical vapor filling 
the regions of space. Kepler, like Tycho Brahe, believed 
that the new stars had been conglomerated from this vapor, 
and that they were again dissolved in it.J Comets to which, 

* Laplace says of Kepler's theory of the measurement of casks {Ste- 
reometria Doliorum), 1615, " which, like the sand-reckoning of Archi- 
medes, develops elevated ideas on a subject of little importance;" 
" Kepler presente dans cet ouvrage des vues sur I'infini qui ont influ6 
8ur la revolution que la Geometrie a eprouvee k la fin du 17^^ siecle ; 
et Fermat, que Ton doit regarder comme le veritable inventeur du calcul 
differentiel, a fonde sur elles sa belle methode de maximis et minimis. 
{Pricis de I' Hist, de I'Astronomie, 1821, p. 95.)" On the geometrical 
power manifested by Kepler in the five books of his Harmonices Mundi, 
Bee Chasles, Apergu Hist, des Milhodes en GeomHrie, 1837, p. 482-487. 

t Sir David Brewster elegantly remarks, in the account of Kepler's 
method of investigating truth, tliat " the influence of imagination as an 
instrument of research has Deen much overlooked by those who have 
ventured to give laws to philosophy. This faculty is of greatest value 
in physical inquiries; if we use it as a guide and confide in its indica- 
tions, it will infallibly deceive us ; but if we employ it as an auxiliary, 
it will afford us the most invaluable aid" {Martyrs of Science, p. 215). 

% Arago, in the Annuaire, 1842, p. 434 (De la Transformation det 



328 COSMOS. 

before the discovery of the elliptic orbic of the planets, he a* 
cribed a rectilinear and not a closed revolving course, were 
regarded by him, in 1608, in his " new and singular discourse 
on the hairy stars," as having originated from "celestial air." 
He even added, in accordance with ancient fancies on spon- 
taneous generation, that comets arise " as an herb springs from 
the earth without seed, and as fishes ar' '^rrned in the sea by 
a generatio spo7ita7iea'' 

Happier in his other cosmical conjectures, Kepler hazarded 
the following propositions : that all the fixed stars are suns 
like our own luminary, and surrounded by planetary systems ; 
that our sun is enveloped in an atmosphere which appears 
like a white corona of light during a total solar eclipse ; that 
our Sim is so situated in the great cosmical island as to con- 
stitute the center of the compressed stellar ring of the Milky 
Way ;* that the sun itself, whose spots had not then been 
discovered, together with all the planets and fixed stars, rotates 
on its axis ; that satellites, like those discovered by Galileo 
round Jupiter, will also be discovered round Saturn and Mars ; 
and that in the much too great interval of space between 
Mars and Jupiter,t where we are now acquainted with seven 
asteroids (as between Venus and Mercury), there revolve 
planets which, from their smallness alone, are invisible to the 
naked eye. Presentient propositions of this nature, felicitous 
conjectures of that which was subsequently discovered, excit- 
ed general interest, while none of Kepler's cotemporaries, in- 
cluding Galileo, conferred any adequate praise on the discov- 
ery of the three laws, which, since Newton and the promul- 

N^buleuses et de la Matiire diffuse en Etoiles). Compare Cosmos, vol. 
i., p. 144 and 152. 

* Compare the ideas of Sir John Herschel on the position of our 
planetary system, vol. i., p. 141 ; also Struve, Etudes d^Astronomle Stel' 
laire, 1847, p. 4. 

t Apelt says (Epochen der Geschichte der Menschheit, bd. i., 1845, s. 
223): "the remarkable law of the distances, which is usually known 
under the name of Bode's law (or that of Titius), is the discovery of 
Kepler, who, after many years of persevering industry, deduced it from 
the observations of Tycho de Brahe." See Harmonices Mnndi lihrt 
quinque, cap. 3. Compare, also, Cournot's Additions to his French 
translation of Sir John Herschel's Astronomy, 1834, ^ 434, p. 324, and 
Fries, Vorlesungen uber die Sternkunde, 1813, s. 325 (On the Law of 
the Distances in the Secondary Planets). The passages from Plato, 
Pliny, Censorinus, and Achilles Tatius, in the Prolegomena to the 
Aratus, are carefully collected in Fries, Geschichte der Philosophic, bd- 
1., 1837, 8. 146-150; in Martin, Etudes sur le TimSe, t. ii., p. 38; and in 
Brandis, Geschichte der Griechisch-Romischen Philosophie, th. ii., abth. 
i., 1844, s. 364. 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 329 

gation of the theory of gravitation, have immortaUzed the 
name of Kepler.* Cosmical considerations, even when based 
merely on feeble analogies and not on actual observations, 
riveted the attention more pow^erfully then, as they still fre- 
quently do, than the most important results of calculating 
astronomy. 

After having described the important discoveries which in 
so small a cycle of years extended the knowledge of the re- 
gions of space, it still remains for me to revert to the advances 
in physical astronomy which characterize the latter half of 
this great century. The improvement in the construction of 
telescopes led to the discovery of Saturn's satellites. Huy- 
gens, on the 25th of March, 1655, fortyrfive years after the 
discovery of Jupiter's satellites, discovered the sixth of these 
bodies through an object-glass which he had himself polished. 
Owing to a prejudice, which he shared with other astrono- 
mers of his time, that the number of the secondary planetary 
bodies could not exceed that of the primary planets.f he did 
not seek to discover other satellites of Saturn. Dominicus 
Cassini discovered four of these bodies, the Sidera Lodivicea, 
viz., the seventh and outermost in 1671, which exhibits 
great alternation of light, the fifth in 1672, and the fourth 
and third in 1684, through Campani's object-glass, having a 
focal length of 100-136 feet ; the two innermost, the first and 
second, were discovered more than a century later (1788 and 
1789) by William Herschel, through his colossal telescope. 
The last-named of these satellites presents the remarkable 
phenomenon of accomplishing its revolution round the prima- 
ry planet in less than one day. 

Soon after Huygens's discovery of a satellite of Saturn, 
Childrey first observed the zodiacal light, between the years 
1658 and 1661, although its relations in space were not de- 
termined until 1683 by Dominicus Cassini. The latter did 
not regard it as a portion of the sun's atmosphere, but behov- 
ed, with Schubert, Laplace, and Poisson, that it was a de- 
tached revolving nebulous ring.J Next to the recognition of 
the existence of secondary planets, and of the free and con 
centrically divided rings of Saturn, the conjecture of the prob- 
able existence of the nebulous zodiacal light belongs incon- 
testably to the grandest enlargement of our views regarding 
the planetary system, which had previously appeared so sim* 

* Delarabre, Hist, de VAstronomie Moderne. t- i., p. 360. 
t Arago, in the Annuaire for 1842, p. 560-5^14; also Cosmos, vol. i,, 
p. 97. t Compare Cosmnj, vol. i., p. 137-144. 



330 COSMOS. 

pie. In our own time, the intersecting orbits of the small 
planets between Mars and Jupiter, the interior comets, which 
were first proved to bo such by Encke, and the swarms of 
falling stars associated with definite days (since we can not 
regard these bodies in any other light than as such cosmical 
masses moving with planetary velocity), have enriched our 
views of the universe with a remarkable abundance of new 
objects. 

During the age of Kepler and Galileo, our ideas were very 
considerably enlarged regarding the contents of the regions of 
space, or, in other words, the distribution of all created mat- 
ter beyond the outermost circle of the planetary bodies, and 
beyond the orbit of any comet. In the same period in which 
(1572-1604) three new stars of the first magnitude suddenly 
appeared in Cassiopeia, Cygnus, and Ophiuchus, David Fa- 
bricius, pastor at Ostell, in East Friesland (the father of the 
discoverer of the sun's spots), in 1596, and Johann Bayer, at 
Augsburg, in 1603, observed in the neck of the constellation 
Cetus another star, which again disappeared, whose changing 
brightness was first recognized by Johann Phocylides Holwar- 
da, professor at Francker (in 1638 and 1639), as we learn 
from a treatise of Arago, which has thrown much light on the 
history of astronomical discoveries.* The phenomenon was 
not singular in its occurrence, for, during the last half of the 
seventeenth century, variable stars were periodically observed 
in the head of Medusa, in Hydra, and in Cygnus. The man- 
ner in which accurate observations of the alternations of light 
in Algol are able to lead directly to a determination of the 
velocity of the light of this star, has been ably shown by the 
treatise to which I have alluded, and which was published in 
1842. 

The use of the telescope now excited astronomers to the 

* Annuaire du Bureau des Longitudes four Van 1842, p. 312-353 (Eto- 
iles Changeantes ou PSriodiques). In the seventeenth century there 
were recognized, as variable stars, besides Mira Ceti (Holvvarda, 1638), 
t HydruB (Montanari, 1672), (3 Persei or Algol, and x Cygni (Kirch, 
1686). On what Galileo calls nebulifi, see his Opere, t. ii., p. 15, and 
Nelli, Vita, vol. ii., p. 208. Hay gens, in the Sy sterna Saturninum, re- 
fers most distinctly to thp nebula in the sword of Orion, in saying of 
nebulte generally, " Cui certe simile aliud nusquam apud reliquas fixaa 
petui animadvertere. Nam ceterae nebulosse olim existimatae atque ipsa 
via lactea, perspicillis inspectae, nuUas nebulas habere comperiuntur, 
ueque aliud esse quam plurium stellarum congeries et frequeutia." It 
13 seen from this passage that the nebula in Andromeda, which waa 
first described by Marius, had not been attentively considered by 
Huygeus any more than by Galileo. 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES 331 

earnest observation of a class of phenomena, some of which 
could not even escape the naked eye. Simon Marius describ- 
ed in 1612 the nebula in Andromeda, and Huygens, in 1656, 
drew the figure of that in the stars of the sword of Orion. 
Both nebulae might serve as types of a more or less advanced 
condensation of nebulous cosmical matter. Marius, when he 
compared the nebula in Andromeda to " a wax taper seen 
through a semi-transparent medium," indicated very forcibly 
the difference between nebulse generally and the stellar mass- 
es and jj:roups in the Pleiades and in Cancer, examined by 
Gahleo. As early as the sixteenth century, Spanish and Port- 
uguese sea-farers, without the aid of telescopic vision, had no- 
ticed with admiration the two Magellanic clouds of light re- 
volving round the south pole, of which one, as we have observ- 
ed, was known as " the white spot" or " white ox" of the Per- 
sian astronomer Abdurrahman Sufi, who lived in the middle 
of the tenth century. Gahleo, in the Nujiciiis Siderius, uses 
the terms " stellce ncbulosce'' and " nebidoscB'' to designate clus- 
ters of stars, which, as he expresses it, like areolce sparsini per 
cethera subfulgetit. As he did not bestow any especial atten- 
tion on the nebula in Andromeda, which, although visible to 
the naked eye, had not hitherto revealed any star under the 
highest magnifying powers, he regarded all nebulous appear 
ances, all his 7iebidosce, and the Milky Way itself, as lumm- 
ous masses ibrmed of closely-compressed stars. He did not 
distinguish between the nebula and star, as Huygens did in 
the case of the nebulous spot of Orion. These are the feeble 
beginnings of the great works on Nebulce, which have so hon- 
orably occupied the first astronomers of our own time in both 
hemispheres. 

Although the seventeenth century owes its principal splen- 
dor at its beginning to the sudden enlargement afforded to the 
knowledge of the heavens, imparted by the labors of Galileo 
and Kepler, and at its close to the advance in mathematical 
science, due to Newton and Leibnitz, yet the greater number 
of the physical problems which occupy us in the present day 
likewise experienced beneficial consideration in the same cen- 
tury. In order not to depart from the character pecuUarly 
appropriate to a history of the contemplation of the universe, 
I limit myself to a mere enumeration of the works which have 
exercised direct and special influence on general, or, in other 
words, on cosmical views of nature. With reference to the 
processes of light, heat, and magnetism, I would first name 
Huygens. Galileo, and Gilbert. While Huygens was occur 



332 COSMOS. 

pied with the double refraction of light in crystals of Iceland 
spar, i. e., with the separation of the pencils of light into two 
parts, lie also discovered, in 1678, that kind of polarization of 
light which bears his name. The discovery of this isolated 
phenomenon, which was not published till 1690, and, conse- 
quently, only five years before the death of Huygens, was fol- 
lowed, after the lapse of more than a century, by the great 
discoveries of Mains, Arago, Fresnel, Brewster, and Biot.* 
Malus, in 1808, discovered polarization by reflection fram pol- 
ished surfaces, and Arago, in 1811, made the discovery of col- 
ored polarization. A world of wonder, composed of manifold 
modified weaves of light, having new properties, was now re- 
vealed. A ray of light, which reaches our eyes, after travers- 
ing millions of miles, from the remotest regions of heaven, an- 
nounces of itself, in Arago' s polariscope, whether it is reflected 
or refracted, w^hether it emanates from a solid, or fluid, of 
gaseous body ; announcing even the degree of its intensity.! 
By pursuing this course, which leads us back through Huygens 
to the seventeenth century, we are instructed concerning the 
constitution of the solar body and its envelopes ; the reflected 
or the proper light of cometary tails and the zodiacal light ; 
the optical properties of our atmosphere ; and the position of 
the four neutral points of polarization^ which Arago, Babinet, 
and Brewster discovered. Thus does man create new organs, 
which, when skillfully employed, reveal to him new views of 
the universe. 

Next to polarization I should name the interference of light, 
the most striking of all optical phenomena, faint traces of which 
were also observed in the seventeenth century — by Grimaldi 
in 1665, and by Hooke, although without a proper understand- 
ing of its original and causal conditions.^ Modern times owe 
the discovery of these conditions, and the clear insight into the 
laws, according to which, (unpolarized) rays of light, emana- 
ting from one and the same source, but with a different length 
of path, destroy one another and produce darkness, to the suc- 
cessful penetration of Thomas Young. The laws of the in 

* On the important law discovered by Brewster, of the connection 
between the angle of complete polarization and the index of refraction 
Bee Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society for the Year 1815 
p. 125-159. t See Cosmos, vol. i., p. 39 and 52. 

\ Sir David Brewster, in Berghaus and Johnson's Physical Atlas, 1847 
Part vii., p. 5 {Polarization of the Atmosphere). 

$ On Grimaldi's and Hooke's attempt to explain the polarization of 
Boap-bubbles by the interference of the rays of light, Bee Arago, in th« 
Annuaire for 1831, p. 164 (Brewster's Life of Neivton p. 53). 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 333 

terference of polarized liglit were discovered in 1816 by Ara- 
go and Fresiiel. The theory of undulations advanced by Hiiy- 
gens and Hooke, and defended by Leonhard Euler, was at 
length established on a firm and secure basis. 

Although the latter half of the seventeenth century acquir- 
ed distinction from the attainment of a successful insight into 
the nature of double refraction, by which optical science was 
so much enlarged, its greatest splendor was derived from New- 
ton's experimental researches, and Olaus Romer's discovery, 
in 1675, of the measurable velocity of light. Haifa century 
afterward, in 1728, this discovery enabled Bradley to regard 
the variation he had observed in the apparent place of the 
stars as a conjoined consequence of the movement of the 
earth in its orbit, and of the propagation of hght. Newton's 
splendid work on Optics did not appear in English till 1704, 
having been deferred, from personal considerations, till two 
years after Hooke's death ; but it would seem a well-attested 
fact that, even before the years 1666 and 1667,* he was in 
possession of the principal points of his optical researches, his 
theory of gravitation and differential calculus (method of flux- 
ions). 

In order not to sever the links which hold together the gen- 
eral primitive phenomena of matter in one common bond, 1 
would here immediately, after my succinct notice of the op- 
tical discoveries of Huygens, Grimaldi, and Newton, pass to 

* Brewster, The Life of Sir Isaac Newton, p. 17. The date of the 
year 1665 has been adopted for that of the invention of the method of 
Huxions, which, according to the official explanations of the Committee 
of the Royal Society of London, April 24, 1712, is "one and the same 
with the dilFerential method, excepting the name and mode of nota 
tion." With reference to the whole unhappy contest on the subject of 
priority with Leibnitz, in which, strange to say, accusations against 
Newton's orthodoxy were even advanced, see Brewster, p. 189-218. 
The fact that all colors are contained in white light was already main- 
tained by De la Chambre, in his work entitled "La Lwrniere" (Paris, 
1657), and by Isaac Vossius (who was afterward a canon at Windsor), 
in a remarkable memoir entitled " De Lucis Natnra et Proprietate'^ 
(Amstelod., 1662), for the knowledge of which I was indebted, two 
years ago, to M. Arago, at Paris. Brandis treats of this memoir in the 
new edition oi GiihXer^s, PhysikaUsche Wdrlerhich,h(\A\. (1827), s. 43, 
and Wilke notices it very fully in his Gesch. der Optlk, th. i. (1838), 
s. 223, 228, and 317. Isaac Vossius, however, considered the funda- 
mental substance of all colors (cap. 25, p. 60) to be sulphur, which 
forms, according to him, a component part of all bodies. In Vossii Re- 
tponsum ad Objecta, Joh. de Bi^yn, Proftssoris Trajectini, et Petri Petui, 
1663, it is said, p. 69, Nee lumea ullum est absque calore, nee calor ul- 
lus absque lumiue. Lnx sonus, anima (!) odor, vis magnetica, quamvia 
incorp-rea,, sunt tamen aliquid. (De Lucia Nat., cap. 13, p 29.) 



334 COSMOS. 

the consideration of terrestrial magnetism and atmospheric 
temperature, as far as these sciences are included in the cen- 
tury which we have attempted to describe. The able and 
important work on magnetic and electric forces, the Physio- 
logia nova cle Magnele, by William Gilbert, to which I have 
frequently had occasion to allude,* appeared in the year 1600 
This writer, whose sagacity of mind was so highly admired 
by Galileo, conjectured many things of which we have now 
acquired certain knowledge. t Gilbert regarded terrestrial 
magnetism and electricity as two emanations of a single fun- 
damental force pervading all matter, and he therefore treated 
of both at once. Such obscure conjectures, based on analogies 
of the effect of the Heraclean magnetic stone on iron, and the 
attractive force exercised on dry straws by amber, when ani- 
mated, as Pliny expresses it, with a soul by the agency of 
heat and friction, appertain to all ages and all races, to the 
Ionic natural philosophy no less than to the science of the 
Chinese physicists.^ According to Gilbert's idea, the earth 
itself is a magnet, while he considered that the inflections of 
the lines of equal declination and inclination depend upon the 
distribution of mass, the configuration of continents, or the 
form and extent of the deep, intervening oceanic basins. It 
is difficult to connect the periodic variations which character- 
ize the three principal forms of magnetic phenomena (the iso- 
clinal, isogenic, and isodynaraic lines) with this rigid system 
oi the distribution of force and mass, unless we represent to 
ourselves the attractive force of the material particles modi- 
fied by similar periodic changes of temperature in the interior 
of the terrestrial planet. 

In Gilbert's theory, as in gravitation, the quantity of tlie 
material particles is merely estimated, without regard to the 
specific heterogeneity of substances. This circumstance gave 
his work, at the time of Galileo and Kepler, a character of 
cosmical greatness. The unexpected discovery of rotation- 
magnetism by Arago in 1825, has shown practically that ev- 
ery kind of matter is susceptible of magnetism ; and the most 
recent investigations of Faraday on dia-magnetic substances 

* Cosmos, vol. i., p. 177, 179, and vol. ii., p. 278. 

t Lord Bacon, whose comprehensive, and, generally speaking, free 
and methodical viev^rs, were unfortunately accompanied by very limit- 
ed mathematical and physical knowledge, even for the age in which 
he Hved, was veiy uujust to Gilbert. " Bacon showed his inferior apt. 
itude for physical research in rejecting the Copernican doctrine which 
William Gilbert adopted" (Whewell, Philosophy of the Inductive Sci 
eiuieg, vol* ii.» p. 378). I Cosmot, vol. i.» p» ISa 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 335 

have, under especial conditions of meridian or equatorial direc 
tion, and of solid, fluid, or gaseous inactive conditions of the 
bodies, aonfirmed this important result. Gilbert had so clear 
an idea of the force imparted by telluric magnetism, that he 
ascribed the magnetic condition of iron rods on crosses of old 
church towers to this action of the Earth.* 

The increased enterprise and activity of navigation to the 
higher latitudes, and the improvement of magnetic instru- 
ments, to which had been added, since 1576, the dipping 
needle (inclinatorium), constructed by Robert Norman, of 
Ratclifi', were the means, during the course of the seventeenth 
century, of extending the general knowledge of the periodical 
advance of a portion of the magnetic curves or lines of no va- 
riation. The position of the magnetic equator, which was be- 
lieved to be identical with the geographical equator, remained 
uninvestigated. Observations of inclination were only carried 
on in a few of the capital cities of Western and Southern Eu- 
rope. Graham, it is true, attempted in London, in 1723, to 
measure, by the oscillations of a magnetic needle, the intensity 
of the magnetic terrestrial force, which varies both with space 
and time ; but, since Borda's fruitless attempt on his last voy- 
age to the Canaries in 1776, Lemanon was the first who suc- 
ceeded, in La Perouse's expedition in 1785, in comparing the 
intensity in diflerent regions of the earth. 

In the year 1683, Edmund Halley sketched his theory of 
four magnetic poles or points of convergence, and of the peri- 
odical movement of the magnetic line without declination, bas- 
ing his theory on a large number of existing observations of 
declination of very unequal value, by Baffin, Hudson, James 
Hall, and Schouten. In order to test this theory, and render 
it more perfect by the aid of new and more exact observations, 
the English government permitted him to make three voyages 
(1698-1702) in the Atlantic Ocean, in a vessel under his own 
command. In one of these he reached 52*^ S. lat. This ex 
pedition constituted an epoch in the history of telluric mag 
netism. Its result was the construction of a general variation 
chart, on which the points at which navigators had found an 
equal amount of variation were connected together by curved 

* The first observation of the kind was made (1590) on the tower of 
the church of the Augustines at Mantua. Grimaldi and Gassendi were 
acquainted with similar instances, all occurring in geographical lati- 
tudes where the inclination of the magnetic needle is very considerable. 
On the first measurements of magnetic intensity by the oscillation of a 
needle, compare my Relation Hist.^ t. i., p. 260-264, and CotmoSf vol 
i'., p. 18^6, 1§7, 



336 COSMOS. 

lines. Never before, I believe, had any government fitted out 
a naval expedition for an object whose attainment promised 
such advantages to practical navigation, while, at the same 
time, it deserved to be regarded as peculiarly scientific and 
physico-mathematical. 

As no phenomenon can be thoroughly investigated by a 
careful observer, without being considered in its relation to 
other phenomena, Halley, on his return from his voyage, haz- 
arded the conjecture that the northern light was of a magnet- 
ic origin. I have remarked, in the general picture of nature, 
that Faraday's brilliant discovery (the evolution of light by 
magnetic force) has raised this hypothesis, enounced as early 
as in the year 1714, to empirical certainty. 

But if the laws of terrestrial magnetism are to be thorough 
ly investigated — that is to say, if they are to be sought in the 
great cycle of the periodic movement in space of the three va- 
rieties of magnetic curves, it is by no means sufficient that 
the diurnal regular or disturbed course of the needle should 
be observed at the magnetic stations which, since 1828, have 
begun to cover a considerable portion of the earth's surface, 
both in northern and southern latitudes ;* but four times in 
every century an expedition of three ships should be sent out, 
to examine, as nearly as possible at the same time, the state 
of the magnetism of the Earth, so far as it can be investiga- 
ted in those parts which are covered by the ocean. The mag- 
netic equator, or the curve at which the inclination is null, 
must not merely be inferred from the geographical position of 
its nodes (the intersections with the geographical equator), but 
the course of the ship should be made continually to vary ac- 
cording to the observations of inclination, so as never to leave 
the track of the magnetic equator for the time being. Land 
expeditions should be combined with these voyages, in order, 
where masses of land can not be entirely traversed, to determ- 
ine at what points of the coast-line the magnetic curves (es- 
pecially those having no variation) enter. Special attention 
might also, perhaps, be deservedly directed to the movement 
and gradual changes in the oval configuration and almost con- 
centric curves of variation of the two isolated closed systems 
in Eastern Asia, and in the South Pacific in the meridian of 
the Marquesas Group. t Since the memorable Antarctic ex- 
pedition of Sir James Clark Ross (1839-1843), fitted out 
with admirable instruments, has thrown so much light over 
the polar regions of the southern hemisphere, and has deterra* 

• Cosmos, vol. i., p. 190-192. i Cosmos, vol. i., p. 182. 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 337 

ined empirically the position of the magnetic south pole ; and 
since my honored friend, the great mathematician, Frederic 
Gauss, has succeeded in establishing the first general theory 
of terrestrial magnetism, we nefed not renounce the hope that 
the many requirements of science and navigation will lead to 
the realization of the plan I have already proposed. May 
the year 1850 be marked as the first normal epoch in which 
the materials for a magnetic chart shall be collected ; and 
may permanent scientific institutions (academies) impose upon 
themselves the practice of reminding, every twenty-five or 
thirty years, governments favorable to the advance of naviga- 
tion, of the importance of an undertaking whose great cosmic- 
al importance depends on its long-continued repetition. 

The invention of instruments for measuring temperature 
(Galileo's thermoscopes of 1593 and 1602,* depending simul- 
taneously on the changes in the temperature and the external 
pressure of the atmosphere) gave origin to the idea of determ- 
ining the modifications of the atmosphere by a series of con- 
nected and successive observations. We learn from the Df 
ario delV Accademia del Ciniento, which exercised so happy 
an influence on the taste for experiments, conducted in a reg- 
ular and systematic method during the brief term of its activity, 
that observations of the temperature were made with spirit 
thermometer* similar to our own at a great number of sta- 
tions, among others at Florence, in the Convent Degli Angeli, 
in the plains of Lombardy, on the mountains near Pistoja, and 
even in the elevated plain of Innspruck, as early as 1641, an 
five times daily .f The Grand-duke Ferdinand II. employea 
the monks in many of the monasteries of his states to perform 
this task.J The temperature of mineral springs was also de- 
termined at that period, and thus gave occasion to many ques- 

* On the oldest thermometers, see Nelli, Vita e Commer do Letter ario 
di Galilei (Losanna, 1793), vol. i., p. 68-94 ; Opere di Galilei (Padovo, 
1744), t. i., p. Iv. ; Libri, Histoire des Sciences Mathematiques en Italic, 
t. iv. (1841), p. 185-197. As evidences of first compai'ative observa- 
tions on temperature, we may instance the letters of Gianfrancesco Sa- 
gredo and Benedetto CasteUi in 1613, 1615, and 1633, given in Venturi, 
Memorie e Lettere inedite di Galilei, Part i., 1818, p. 20. 

t Vincenzio Antinori, in the Saggi di Naturali Esperienze, fatte neW 
Accademia del Cimento, 1841, p. 30-44. 

X On the determination of the thermometric scale of the Accademia 
del Cimento, and on the meteorological observations continued for six- 
teen years by a pupil of Galileo, Father Raiueri, see Libri, in the An- 
nales de Chimie et de Physique, t. xlv., 1830, p. 354 ; and a more recent 
similar work by Schouw, in his Tableau du Climat et de la V6g6t{ttion 
de r Italic, 1839, p. 99-106. 
A^OL. II.—P 



358 COSMOS. 

tions regarding the temperature of the Earth. As all natural 
phenomena — all the changes to which terrestrial matter ig 
subject — are connected with modifications of heat, light, and 
electricity, whether at rest or moving in currents, and as like- 
v/ise the phenomena of temperature, acting by the force of 
expansion, are most easily discernible by the sensuous percep- 
tions, the invention and improvement of thermometers must 
necessarily, as I have already elsewhere observed, indicate a 
great epoch in the general progress of natural science. The 
range of the applicability of the thermometer, and the rational 
deductions to be arrived at from its indications, are as immeas- 
urable as the sphere of those natural forces which exercise 
their dominion over the atmosphere, the solid portions of the 
earth, and the superimposed strata of the ocean — alike over 
inorganic substances, and the chemical and vital processes of 
organic matter. 

The action of radiating heat was likewise investigated, a 
century before the important labors of Scheele, by the Floren- 
tine members of the Accademia del Cimento, by remarkable 
experiments with concave mirrors, against which non-lumin 
ous heated bodies, and masses of ice weighing 500 lbs., act- 
ually and ajjparoitly radiated.* Mariotte, at the close of 
the seventeenth century, entered into investigations regarding 
the relations of radiating heat in its passage through glass 
plates. It has seemed necessary to allude to these isolated 
experiments, since in more recent times the doctrine of the 
radiation of heat has thrown great light on the cooling of the 
ground, the formation of dew, and many general chmatic 
modifications, and has led, moreover, through Melloni's admi- 
rable sagacity, to the contrasting diathermism of rock salt 
and alum. 

To the investigations on the changes in the temperature of 
the atmosphere, depending on the geographical latitude, the 
seasons of the year, and the elevation of the spot, were soon 
added other inquiries into the variation of pressure and the 
quantity of vapor in the atmosphere, and the often-observed 
periodic results, known as the laiu of rotation of the winds. 
Galileo's correct views respecting the pressure of the atmos- 
phere led Torricelli, a year after the death of his great teacher, 
to the construction of the barometer. It would appear that 
the fact that the column of mercury in the Torricellian column 
Atood higher at the base of a tower or hill than at its summit, 

* Ai\t\nov\, Saggi delV Accad. del Cim., 1841, p. M4, and in the Ag 
^iunte at the end of the book, p. Ixxvi. 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 33S 

was first observed at Pisa by Claudio Beriguardi ;^ and five 
years later in France, at the suggestion of Pascal, by Perrier, 
the brother-in-law of the latter, when he ascended the Puy dt 
Dome, which is nearly one thousand feet higher than Vesu- 
vius. The idea of employing barometers for measuring eleva 
tions now presented itself readily ; it may, perhaps, have been 
suggested to Pascal in a letter of Descartes. f It is not nec- 
essary to enter into any especial explanation of the influence 
exercised on the enlargement of physical geography and mete 
orology by the barometer when used as a hypsometrical instru 
ment in determining the local relations of the Earth's surface, 
and as a meteorological instrument in ascertaining the influ- 
ence of atmospheric currents. The theory of the atmospheric 
currents already referred to was established on a solid foun- 
dation before the close of the seventeenth century. Bacon 
had the merit, in 1664, in his celebrated work entitled His- 
toria Naturalis et Experimentalis de Ventis,t of considering 
the direction of the winds in their dependence on thermometric 
and hydrometric relations ; but, unmathematically denying the 
correctness of the Copernican system, he conjectured the pos- 
sibility " that our atmosphere may daily turn round the earth 
like the heavens, and thus occasion the tropical east wind." 

Hooke's comprehensive genius here also diliused order and 
light. ^ He recognized the influence of the rotation of the 
Earth, and the existence of the upper and lower currents of 
warm and cold air, which pass from the equator to the poles, 
and return from the poles to the equator. Gahleo, in his last 
Dlalogo, had indeed also regarded the trade winds as the con- 
sequence of the rotation of the Earth ; but he ascribed the 
detention of the particles of air within the tropics (when com- 
pared with the velocity of the Earth's rotation) to a vaporless 
purity of the air in the tropical regions. ll Hooke's more cor- 

* Antinori, p. 29. 

t Ren. Cartesii Epistola (Amstelod., 1682), Part iii., ep. 67. 

X Bacon's Works, by Shaw, 1733, vol. iii., p. 441. (See Cosmos, vol 
i., p. 315.) 

$ Hooke's Posthumous Works, p. 364. (Compare my Relat. Histo 
rique, t. i., p. 199.) Hooke, however, like Galileo, unhappily assumed 
a difference in the velocity of the rotation of the Earth and of the atmos- 
phere. See Posik. Works, p. 88 and 363. 

11 Although, according to Galileo's views, the detention of the parti 
cles of air is one of the causes of the trade winds, yet his hypothesis 
ought not to be confounded, as has recently been done, with that of 
Hooke and Hadley. Galileo, in the Dialogo quarto (^Opere, t. iv., p. 
311), makes Salviati say, " Dicevamo pur' ora che' I'aria, come corpo 
tenue, e fluido. o nou saldamcute congiunto alia terra, pareva che non 



(140 COSMOS 

rect view was taken up by Halley late in the eighteenth 
century, and was then more fully and satisfactorily explained 
with reference to the action of the velocity of rotation pe 
culiar to each parallel of latitude. Halley, prompted by his 
long sojourn in the torrid zone, had even earlier (1686) pub- 
lished an admirable empirical work on the geographical ex- 
tension of trade winds and monsoons. It is surprising that 
he should not have noticed, in his magnetic expeditions, the 
law of rotation of the winds, which is so important for the 
whole of meteorology, since its general features had been rec- 
ognized by Bacon and Johann Christian Sturm, of Hippol- 
stein (according to Brewster, the actual discoverer of the 
differential thermometer*). 

In the brilliant epoch characterized by the foundation of 
mathematical natural philosophy, experiments were not want- 
ing for determining the connection existing between the hu- 
midity of the atmosphere, and the changes in the tempera- 
ture and the direction of the winds. The Accademia del 
Cimento had the felicitous idea of determining the quantity 
of vapor by evaporation and precipitation. The oldest Flor- 
entijie hygrometer was accordingly a condensation-hygrome- 
ter — an apparatus in which the quantity of the discharged 

avesse necessit£l d'pbbedire al suo moto, se nou in quanto 1' asprezza 
della superficie terrestre iie rapisce, e seco porta una parte a se contigua, 
che di non molto intervallo sopravanza le maggiori altezze delle mon- 
tagne ; la qual pozzion d'aria tanto meno dovr^ esser renitente alia 
conversion terrestre, qiianto che ella 6 ripiena di vapori, fumi, ed esala- 
zioni, materie tutte participant] delle qualita terrene : e per conseguen- 
za atte nate per lor natura (? ) a i medesimi raovimenti. Ma dove, man- 
cassero le cause del moto, cio6 dovala superficie del globo avesse grandi 
spazii piani, e meno vi fusse della mistione de i vapori terreni, quivi ces- 
serebbe in parte la causa, per la quale 1' aria arabiente dovesse total- 
mente obbedire al rapimento della conversion terrestre ; si che in tali 
uoghi, mentre che la terra si volge verso Oriente, si dovrebbe sentir con- 
tinuamente un vento. che si ferisse, spirando da Levante verso Ponente; 
e tale spiramento dovrebbe farsi piu sensibile, dove la vertigine del 
globo fusse piu veloce : il che sarebbe ne i luoghi piu remoti da i Poli, 
e vicini al cerchio massiuio della diurna conversione. L'esperienza ap- 
plaude molto a questo filosofico discorso.poich^ ne gli ampi mari sotto- 
posti alia Zona torrida, dove anco I'evaporazioni terrestri mancano (?) 

si sente una perpetua aura muovere da Oriente " 

* Brewster, in the Edinburgh Journal of Science, vol. ii., 1825, p. 145. 
Sturm has described the Differential Thermometer in a little vt'ork, en- 
titled Collegium Experimentale Curiosum (Nuremberg, 1676), p. 49. 
On the Baconian law of the rotation of the wind, which was first ex- 
tended to both zones, and recognized in its ultimate connection with 
the causes of all atmospheric currents by Dove, see the detailed treatise 
of Muncke,in the new edition of Gehler's PhysiJtal. Worterbrch, bd. 
X.. 8. 2003-2019 and 2030-2035. 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 341 

precipitated water was determined by weight.* In addition 
to the condensation-hygrometer, which, by the aid of the ideas 
of Le Roy in our own times, has gradually led to the exact 
psychrometrical methods of Dalton, Daniell, and August, we 
have (in accordance with the examples set by Leonardo da 
Vincif) the absorption-hygrometer, composed of substances 
taken from the animal and vegetable kingdoms, made by San 
tori (1625), Torricelli (1646), and Molineux. Catgut and the 
spikes of grasses were employed almost simultaneously. In- 
struments of this kind, which were based on the absorption by 
organic substances of the aqueous vapor contained in the at- 
mosphere, were furnished with indicators or pointers, and small 
counter-weights, very similar in their construction to the hair 
and whalebone hygrometers of Saussure and De Luc. The 
instruments of the seventeenth century were, however, defi- 
cient in the fixed points of dryness and humidity so necessary 
to the comparison and comprehension of the results, and which 
were at length determined by Regnault (setting aside the sus- 
ceptibility acquired by time in the hygrometrical substances 
employed). Pictet found the hair of a Guanche mummy 
from Tenerifie, which was perhaps a thousand years old, suf- 
ficiently susceptible in a Saussure's hygrometer.^ 

The electric process was recognized by William Gilbert as 
the action of a proper natural force allied to the magnetic 
force. The book in which this view is first expressed, and in 
which the words electric force, electric emanations, and elec- 
tric attraction are first used, is the work of which I have al- 
ready frequently spoken,^ and which appeared in the year 

* Autinori, p. 45, and even in the Saggi, p. 17-19. 

t Venturi, Essai sur les Ouvrages Physico-mathimatiques de Leonard 
de Vinci, 1797, p. 28. 

X Bibliotheque Universelle de Geneve, t. xxvii., 1824, p. 120. 

$ Gilbert, De Magnete, lib. ii., cap. 2-4, p. 46-71. With respect to 
the interpretation of the nomenclature employed, he already said, 
Electrica quae attrahit eadem ratione ut electrum ; versorium non mag- 
neticum ex quovis metallo, inserviens electricis experimentis. In the 
text itself we find as follows : Magnetic^ ut ita dicam, vel electric^ 
attrahere (vim illam electricam nobis placet appellare . . . .) (p. 52) ; 
effluvia electrica, attractiones electricae. We do not find either the ab- 
stract expression electricitas or the barbarous word magnetismus intro- 
duced in the eighteenth century. On the derivation of rjTiEKTpov, " tho 
attractor and tho attracting stone," from il^tg and lA/fCfv, already in 
dicated in the Timseus of Plato, p. 80, c, and the probable transition 
through a harder ITisKTpov, see Buttmann, Mythologus, bd. ii. (1829), 
s. 357. Among the theoretical propositions put forward by Gilbert 
(which are not always expressed with equal clearness), I give the fol- 
lowing: "Cum duo sint corporura genera, quae " manifestis seusibui 



342 COSMOS. 

1600, under the title of " Physiology of Magnets and of the 
Earth as a great Magnet (de magno magnete tellure)." *' The 
property," says Gilbert, " of attracting light substances, when 
rubbed, be their nature what it may, is not peculiar to amber, 
wliich is a condensed earthy juice cast up by the waves of 
the sen, and in which flying insects, ants, and worms lie en- 
tombed as in eternal sepulchers (aeternis sepulchris). The 
force of attraction belongs to a whole class of very different 
substances, as glass, sulphur, sealing wax, and all resinous sub- 
stances, rock crystal, and all precious stones, alum, and rock 
salt." Gilbert measured the strength of the excited electrici- 
ty by means of a small needle, not made of iron, which moved 
freely on a pivot {versorium electricmn), and perfectly similar 
to the apparatus used by Haiiy and Brewster in testing the 
electricity excited in minerals by heat and friction. "Fric- 
tion," says Gilbert further, " is productive of a stronger ef- 
fect in dry than in humid air; and rubbing with silk cloths 
is most advantageous. The globe is held together as by an 
electric force (?) Globus telluris per se electrice congregatur 
et cohaeret ; for the tendency of the electric action is to pro- 
duce the cohesive accumulation of matter (motus electricus 
est motus coacervationis materise)." In these obscure ax- 
ioms we trace the recognition o£ terrestrial electricity — the ex- 
pression of a force — which, like magnetism, appertains as 
such to matter. As yet we meet with no allusions to re- 
pulsion, or the diiference between insulators and conductors. 
Otto von Guericke, the ingenious inventor of the air pump, 
was the first who observed any thing more than mere phenom- 
ena of attraction. In his experiments with a rubbed piece 
of sulphur, he recognized the phenomena of repulsion, which 

nostris motionibus coi-pora allicere videntur, Electrica et Magnetica ; 
Electrica naturalibus ab humore effluviis ; Magnetica formalibus effi- 
cientiis seu potius pi'imariis vigoribus, incitationes faciunt. Facile est 
horainibus ingenio acutis, absque experimentis et usu rerum labi, et 
errare. Substantia? proprietates aut familiaritates, sunt generales ni- 
mis, nee tamen ver^e designataj causse, atque, ut ita dicam, verba quce- 
dam sonant, re ipsa nihil in specie ostendunt. Neqjie ista succini cre- 
dita attractio, a singular! aliquaproprietate substantia?, aut familiarita- 
te assurgit ; cum in pluribus aliis corporibus eundern elfectum, majori 
industria invenimus, et omnia etiam coi*pora cujusmodicunque proprie- 
tatis, ab omnibus illiis alliciuntur." (Z&gt;e Magnete, p. 50, 51, 60, and 
65.) Gilbert's principal labors appear to fall between the years from 
1590 to 1600. Whewell justly assigns him an important place among 
those whom he terms "practical reformers of the physical sciences." 
Gilbert was surgeon to Queen Elizabeth and James I., and died in 
1603. After his death there appeared a second work, entitled "Z&gt;e 
Mundo nostra Suhlunari IViilosophia Nova." 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 343 

Bubsequently led to the establishment of the laws of the sphere 
of action, and of the distribution of electricity. He heard the 
first sound, and saw the first light in artificially-produced elec- 
tricity In an experiment instituted by Newton in 1675, the 
first traces of the electric charge in a rubbed plate of glass 
were seen.* We have here only sought the earliest germs 
of electric knowledge, which, in its great and singularly-re- 
tarded development, has not only become one of the most im- 
portant branches of meteorology, but has also thrown much 
light on the internal action of terrestrial forces, since magnet- 
ism has been recognized as one of the simplest forms under 
which electricity is manifested. 

Although Wall in 1708, Stephen Gray in 1734, and Nol- 
let conjectured the identity of friction-electricity and of light- 
ning, it was first proved with empirical certainty in the mid- 
dle of the eighteenth century by the successful efforts of the 
celebrated Benjamin Franklin. From this period the electric 
process passed frora the domain of speculative physics into that 
of cosmical contemplation — from the recesses of the study to 
the freedom of nature. The doctrine of electricity, like that 
of optics and of magnetism, experienced long periods of ex- 
tremely tardy development, until in these three sciences the 
labors of Franklin and Volta, of Thomas Young and Malus, 
of QErsted and of Faraday, roused their cotemporaries to an 
admirable degree of activity. Such are the alternations of 
slumber and of suddenly-awakened activity that appertain to 
the progress of human knowledge. 

But if, as we have already shown, the relations of tempera- 
ture, the- alternations in the pressure of the atmosphere, and 
the quantity of the vapor contained in it, were made the ob- 
ject of direct investigation by means of the invention of ap- 
propriate, although ^till very imperfect physical instruments, 
and by the acute penetration of Galileo, Torricelli, and the 
members of the Accademia del Cimento, all that refers to the 
chemical composition of the atmosphere remained, on the other 
hand, shrouded in obscurity. The foundations of pneumatic 
chemistry were, it is true, laid by Johann Baptist von Hel- 
mont and Jean Iley in the first half of the seventeenth cen- 
tury, and by Hooke, Mayow, Boyle, and the dogmatizing Be- 
cher in the closing part of the same century ; but, however 
striking may have been the correct apprehension of detached 
and important phenomena, the insight into their connection 
was still wanting. The old belief in the elementary siraplic* 
* Brewster, Life of Newton, p. 307. 



344 COSMOS. 

ity of the air, which acts on combustion, on the oxydation of 
metals, and on respiration, constituted a most powerful imped- 
iment. 

The inflammable or light-extinguishing gases occurring in 
caverns and mines (the sjnritus letales of Pliny), and the es- 
cape of these gases in the form of vesicles in morasses and 
mineral springs, had already attracted the attention of Basilius 
Valentinus, a Benedictine monk of Erfurt (probably at the 
close of the fifteenth century), and of Libavius, an admirer 
of Paracelsus, in 1612. Men drew comparisons between that 
which was accidentally observed in alchemistical laboratories^ 
and that which was found prepared in the great laboratories 
of nature, especially in the interior of the Earth. The work- 
ing of mines in strata, rich in ores (especially those containing 
iron pyrites, which become heated by oxydation and contact- 
electricity), led to conjectures of the chemical relation existing 
between metals, acids, and the external air having access to 
them. Even Paracelsus, whose visionary- fancies belong to 
the period of the first discovery of America, had remarked the 
evolution of gas when iron was dissolved in sulphuric acid. 
Van Helmont, who first employed the term gas, distinguished 
it from atmospheric air, and also, by its non-condensibility, 
from vapors. According to him, the clouds are vapors, and 
become converted into gas, when the sky is very clear, " by 
means of cold and the influence of the stars." Gas can only 
become water after it has been again converted into vapor. 
Such were the views entertained in the first half of the sev- 
enteenth century regarding the meteorological process. Van 
Helmont was not acquainted with the simple method of tak- 
ing up and separating- his gas sylvestre (the name under which 
he comprehended all uninflammable gases which do not main- 
tain combustion and respiration, and differ from pure atmos 
pheric air) ; but he caused a light to burn in a vessel under 
water, and observed that, when the flame was extinguished, 
the water entered, and the 'volume of air diminished. Van 
Helmont likewise endeavored to show by determinations of 
weight (which we find already given by Cardanus) that all 
the solid portions of plants are formed from water. 

The alchemistic opinions of the Middle Ages regarding the 
composition of metals, and the loss of their brilliancy by com- 
bustion in the open air (incineration, calcination), led to a de- 
eire of investigating the conditions by which this process was 
attended, and the changes experienced by the calcined metals, 
and by the air in contact with them. Cardanus, as early as 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 34ft 

in 1553, had noticed the increase of weight that accompaniea 
the oxydation of lead, and, perfectly in accordance with the 
idea of the myth of Phlogiston, had attributed it to the escape 
of a " celestial fiery matter," causing levity ; and it was not 
until eighty years afterward that Jean Rey, a remarkably 
skillful experimenter at Bergerac, who had investigated with 
the greatest care the increase of weight during the calcination 
of lead, tin, and antimony, arrived at the important conclu- 
sion that this increase of weight must be ascribed to the ac- 
cess of the air to the metallic calx. " Je responds et soutiens 
glorieusement," he says, " que ce surcroit de poids vient de 
I'air qui dans le vase a ete espessi."* 

Men had now discovered the path which was to lead them 
to the chemistry of the present day, and through it to the 
knowledge of a great cosmical phenomenon, viz., the connec- 
tion between the oxygen of the atmosphere and vegetable life. 
The combination of ideas, however, which presented itself to 
the minds of distinguished men, was strangely complicated in 
its nature. Toward the close of the seventeenth century a 
belief arose in the existence of nitrous particles {spiritus nitro- 
aereus pabulum nitrosum), which, contained in the air, and 
identical with those which are fixed in saltpetre, were sup- 
posed to possess the necessary requirements for combustion ; 
an opinion which, obscurely expressed by Hooke in his Micro- 
graphia (1671), is found more fully developed by Mayow in 
1669, and by Willis in 1671. " It was maintained that the 
extinction of flame in a closed space is not owing to the over- 
saturation of the air with vapors emanating from the burning 
body, but is the consequence of the entire absorption of the 
spiritus nitro-aereus contained in the nitrogenous air." The 
sudden increase of the glowing heat when fusing saltpetre 
(emitting oxygen) is strewed upon coals, and the formation of 

* Key, strictly speaking, only mentions the access of air to the oxyds; 
he did not know that the oxyds themselves (which were then called 
the earthy metals) are only combinations of metals and air. Accord- 
ing to him, the air makes " the metallic calx heavier, as sand increases 
in weight when water hangs about it." The calx is susceptible of be- 
ing saturated with air. *' L'air espaissi s'attache k la chaux, ainsi le 
poids augmente du commencement jusqu'sl la fin: mais quand tout en 
est affublc, elle n'en s^auroit prendre d'avantage. Ne continuez plus 
votre calcination soubs cet espoir, vous perdriez vostre peine." Key's 
work thus contains the first approach to the better explanation of a 
phenomenon, whose more complete understanding subsequently exer- 
cised a favorable influence in reforming the whole of chemistry. See 
Kopp, Gesch. der Chemie, th. iii., s. 131-133. (Compare, also, in the same 
work, th. i , s. llG-127, and th. iii., s. 119-138, as well as s. ITS-l&amp;.'i. 

P 2 



346 COSMOS. 

saltpetre on clay walls in contact with the atmosphere, ap* 
pear to have contributed jointly to the adoption of this view. 
The nitrous particles of the air influence, according to Mayow, 
^he respiration of animals, the result of which is to generate 
animal heat, and to deprive the blood of its dark color ; and, 
while they control all the processes of combustion and the 
calcination of metals, they play nearly the same part in the 
antiphlogistic chemistry as oxygen. The cautious and doubt- 
ing Robert Boyle was well aware that the presence of a 
certain constituent of atmospheric air was necessary to coni- 
bustion, but he remained uncertain with regard to its nitrous 
nature. 

Oxygen was to Hooke and Mayow an ideal object — a delu- 
sion of the intellect. The acute chemist and vegetable phys- 
iologist Hales first saw oxygen evolved in the form of a gas 
when, in 1727, he was engaged at Mennige in calcining a 
large quantity of lead under a very powerful heat. He ob- 
served the escape of the gas, but he did not examine its na- 
ture, or notice the vivid burning of the flame. Hales had no 
idea of the importance of the substance he had prepared. 
The vivid evolution of light in bodies burning in oxygen, and 
its properties, were, as many persons maintain, discovered in- 
dependently — by Priestley in 1772-1774, by Scheele in 1774- 
1775, and by Lavoisier and Trudaine in 1775.* 

The dawn of pneumatic chemistry has been touched upon 
in these pages with respect to its historical relations, because, 
Hke the feeble beginning of electrical science, it prepared the 
way for those grand views regarding the constitution of the 
atmosphere and its meteorological changes which were mani- 
fested in the following century. The idea of specifically dis 
tinct gases was never perfectly clear to those who, in the sev- 
enteenth century, produced these gases. The difference be- 
tween atmospheric air and the irrespirable light-extinguishing 
or inflammable gases was now again exclusively ascribed to 
the admixture of certain vapors. Black and Cavendish first 
showed, in 1766, that carbonic acid (fixed air) and hydrogen 
f combustible air) are specifically difTerent aeriform fluids. So 
long did the ancient belief of the elementary simplicity of the 
atmosphere check all progress of knowledge. The final knowl- 
edge of the chemical composition of the atmosphere, acquired 
by means of the delicate discrimination of its quantitative re- 

* Priestley's last complaint of that which " Lavoisier is considered to 
have appropriated to himself," is put forth in his little memoir entitled 
*"The Doctrine of Phlogiston Established;' 1800, p. 43. 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 347 

•!itIons by the beautiful researches of Boussingault and Dumas 
is one of the brilliant points of modern meteorology. 

The extension of physical and chemical knowledge, which 
we have here briefly sketched, could not fail to exercise an 
influence on the earliest development of geognosy. A great 
number of the geognostic questions, with the solution of which 
our own age has been occupied, were put forth by a man 
of the most comprehensive acquirements, the great Danish 
anatomist, Nicolaus Steno (Stenson), in the service of the 
Grand-duke of Tuscany, Ferdinand II. ; by another physi- 
cian, Martin Lister, an Englishman, and by Robert Hooke, 
the " worthy rival" of Newton.* Of Steno's services in the 
geognosy of position I have treated more circumstantially in 
another work.t Leonardo da Vinci, toward the close of the 
fifteenth century (probably when he was planning the canals 
in Lombardy which intersect the alluvial and tertiary forma- 
tions), Fracastoro in 1517, on the occasion of the accidental 
exposure of rocky strata, containing fossil fishes, at Monte 
Bolca, near Verona, and Bernard Palissy, in his investiga- 
tions regarding fountains in 1563, had indeed recognized the 
existence of traces of an earlier oceanic Tinimal world. Leo- 
nardo, as if with a presentiment of a more philosophical classi- 
fication of animal forms, terms conch ylia "■animali die hanno 
Vossa di fuora.^^ Steno, in his work on the substances con 
tained in rockg (De Solido intra Solidum naturaliter Contento), 
distinguishes (1669) between (primitive?) rocky strata which 
have become solidified before the creation of plants and ani- 
mals, and therefore contain no organic remains, and sediment- 
ary strata (turbidi maris sedimenta sibi invicem imposita) 
which alternate with one another, and cover the first-named 
strata. All fossiliferous strata were originally deposited in 
horizontal beds. This inclination (or fall) has been occasion- 
ed partly by the eruption of subterranean vapors, generated 
by central heat (ignis in medio terra?), and partly by the giv- 
mg way of the feebly-supported lower strata. $ The valleys 
are the result of this falling in." 

Steno's theory of the formation of valleys is that of De Luc, 
while Leonardo da Vinci, like Cuvier, regards the valleys as 

* Sir John Herscliel, Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy, 
;^. 116. 

t Humboldt, Essai GCognostique sur le Gisemcnt des Roches dans les 
deux HSmispheres, 1823, p. 38. 

t Steno, De Solido intra Solidum naturaliter Contento, 1669, p. 2, 17j 
28, 63, and 69 (fig. 20^25). 



848 COSMOS 

the former beds of streams* In the geognostic character of 
the soil of Tuscany, Steno recognized convulsions which must, 
in his opinion, be ascribed to six great natural epochs (Sex 
sunt distinctae Etruriae facies ex prsesenti facie Etruriee col- 
lectEc). The sea had broken in at six successive periods, and, 
after continuing to cover the interior of the land for a long 
time, had retired within its ancient limits. All petrifactions 
were not, however, according to his opinion, referable to the 
sea ; and he distinguished between pelagic and fresh-water 
formations. Scilla, in 1 670, gave drawings of the petrifac- 
tions of Calabria and Malta ; and among the latter, our great 
anatomist and zoologist, Johannes Miiller, has recognized the 
oldest drawing of the teeth of the gigantic Hydrarchus of Al- 
abama (the Zeuglodo7t cetoides of Owen), a mammal of the 
great order of the Cetacea.t The crown of these teeth is 
formed similarly to those of seals. 

Lister, as early as 1678, made the important assertion that 
each kind of rock is characterized by its own fossils, and that 
" the species of Murex, Tellina, and Trochus, which occur in 
the stone quarries of Northamptonshire, are indeed similar to 
those existing in the present seas, but yet, when more closely 
examined, they are found to differ from them." They are, he 
says, specifically different. $ Strictly conclusive proofs of the 
truth of these grand conjectures could not, however, be ad- 
vanced in the then imperfect condition of descrip^tive morphol- 
ogy. We here indicate the early dawn and speedy extinction 
of light prior to the noble palseontological researches of Cuvier 
and Alexander Brongniart, which have given a new form to 
the geognosy of sedimentary formations. § Lister, whose at- 

* Venturi, Essai sur les Ouvrages Physico-mathimatiques de Leonard 
de Vinci, 1797, $ 5, No. 124. 

t Agostino Scilla, La vana Speculaxione disingannata dal Senso, Nap., 
1670, tab. xii., fig. 1. Compare Job. Mtiller, Bericht uber die von Herm 
Koch, in Alabama Gesammelten Fossilen Knochenreste seines Hydrachus 
(the Basilosaurus of Harlan, 1835 ; the Zeuglodon of Owen, 1839 ; the 
Squalodon of Grateloup, 1840; the Doradon of Gibbes, 1845), read in 
the Royal Academy of Sciences at Berlin, April — June, 1847. These 
valuable fossil remains of an ancient world, which were collected in 
the State of Alabama (in Washington county, near Clarksville), have 
become, by the munificence of our king, the property of the Zoological 
Museum at Berhn since 1847. Besides the remains found in Alabama 
and South Carolina, parts of the Hydrarchus have been found in Eu- 
rope, at Leognan near Bordeaux, near Linz on the Danube, and, in 
1670, in Malta. 

X Martin Lister, in the Philosophical Transactions, vol. vi., 1671, No. 
Ixxvi., p. 2283. 

J See a luminous expositian of the earlier progress of palaeontologicaJ 



mSCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 349 

tention had been drawn to the regular succession of strata in 
England, first felt the want of geognostic maps. Although 
these phenomena, and their dependence on ancient inundations 
(either single or repeated), riveted the attention of men, and, 
mingling belief and knowledge together, gave origin in En- 
gland to the so-called systems of Ray, Woodward, Burnet, and 
Whiston ; yet, owing to the total want of mineralogical dis- 
tinction between the constituents of compound minerals, all 
that relates to crystalline and massive rocks of eruption re- 
mained unexplored. Notwithstanding the opinions held with 
respect to a central heat in the Earth, earthquakes, hot springs, 
and volcanic eruptions were not regarded as the consequence 
of the reaction of the planet against its external crust, but 
were attributed to trifling local causes, as, for instance, the 
spontaneous combustion of beds of iron pyrites. The unscien- 
tific experiments of Lemery (1700) unhappily exercised a long- 
continued influence on volcanic theories, although the latter 
might certainly have been raised to more general views by 
the richly-imaginative Protogcea of Leibnitz (1680). 

The Protogcea, occasionally even more imaginative than 
the many metrical attempts of the same author which have 
lately been made known,* teaches " the scorification of the 
cavernous, glowing, once self-luminous crust of the Earth, the 
gradual cooling of the radiating surface enveloped in vapors, 
the precipitation and condensation of the gradually-cooled, va- 
porous atmosphere into water, the sinking of the level of the 
sea by the penetration of water into the internal cavities of 
the earth, and, finally, the breaking in of these caves, which 
occasions the fall, or horizontal inclination of these strata.'' 
The physical portion of this wild and fanciful view presents 
some leatures which will not appear to merit entire rejection 
by the adherents of our modern geognosy, notwithstanding its 
more perfect development in all its branches. Among these 
better traits we must reckon the movement and heat in the 
interior of the globe, and the cooling occasioned by radiation 
from the surface ; the existence of an atmosphere of vapor ; 
the pressure exercised by these vapors on the Earth's strata 
during their consolidation ; and the two-fold origin of the mass" 

Bancroh Libinuy 

studies, in Whevvell's History of the Inductive Sciences, 1837, vol. iii... 
p. 507-545. 

* Leibnizens, Geschichtliche Aufsdtze und Gedichte, edited by Pertz, 
1847, in the Gesammclte Werke : Oeschichte, bd. iv. On the first sketch 
of the Protogcea of 1691, and on its subsequent revisions, see Tellkampf 
Jahresbericht der Biirgerschule zu Hannover, 1847, s. 1-32. 



350 COSMOS. 

es by fusion and solidification, or by precipitation from tha 
waters. TJ13 typical character and mineralogical differences 
of rocks, or, in other words, the associations of certain mostly 
crystallized substances recurring in the most remote regions, 
are as little made a subject of consideration in the Protogcea 
as in Hooke's geognostic views. Even in the last-named 
writer, physical speculations on the action of subterranean 
forces in earthquakes, in the sudden upheaval of the sea's 
bottom and of littoral districts, and in the origin of islands and 
mountains, hold a prominent place. The nature of the organ- 
ic remains of a former world even led him to conjecture that 
the temperate zone must originally have enjoyed the heat of a 
tropical climate. ^ 

It still remains for us to speak of the greatest of all geog- 
nostic phenomena — the mathematical figure of the Earth — in 
which we distinctly trace a reflection of the primitive world 
in the condition of fluidity of the rotating mass, and its solid- 
ification into our terrestrial spheroid. The main outlines of 
the figure of the Earth were sketched as early as the close of 
the seventeenth century, although the relation between the 
polar and equatorial axes was not ascertained with numerical 
exactness. Picard's measurement of a degree, made in 1670 
with instruments which he had himself improved, is so much 
the more important, since it was the means of inducing New- 
ton to resume with renewed zeal his theory of gravitation 
(which he discovered as early as 1666, but had subsequently 
neglected), by offering to that profound and successful inves- 
tigator the means of proving how the attraction of the Earth 
maintained the Moon in its orbit, while urged on its course 
by the centrifugal force. The fact of the compression of the 
polekS of Jupiter, which was much earlier recognized,* had, as 
it is supposed, induced Newton to reflect on the causes of a 
form which deviated so considerably from sphericity. The 
experim.ents on the actual length of the seconds pendulum by 
Richer at Cayenne in 1673, and by Varin on the western 
coast of Africa, had been preceded by others of less decisive 
character, prosecuted in London, Lyons, and Bologna at a 
difference of 7^ of latitude. f 

The decrease of gravity from the poles to the equator, which 
even Picard had long denied, was now generally admitted. 
Newton recognized the polar compression; and the spheroidal 
form of the earth as a consequence of its rotation ; and ho 

* Cosmos, vol. i., p. 164. 

t Delambre, Hist, de VAstronomie Mod., t. ii., p. 601 



DISCOVERIES IN THE CELESTIAL SPACES. 351 

wen ventured to determine numerically the amount of this 
jompression, on the assumption of the homogeneous nature of 
the mass. It remained for the comparative measurements of 
degrees in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, at the 
equator, near the north pole, and in the temperate zones of 
both the southern and northern hemispheres, to determine 
exactly the mean amount of this compression, and by that 
means to ascertain the true figure of the Earth. The exist- 
ence of this compression announces, as has already been ob- 
served in the " Picture of Nature,"* that which may be nam- 
ed the most ancient of all geognostic events — the condition of 
general fluidity of a planet, and its earlier and progressive so- 
lidification. 

We began our description of the great epoch of Galileo, 
Kepler, Newton, and Leibnitz with the discoveries in the re- 
gions of space by means of the newly-invented telescope, and 
we now close it with the figure of the Earth, as it was then 
recognized from theoretical conclusions. " Newton was ena- 
bled to give an explanation of the system of the universe be- 
3ause he succeeded in discovering the forcef from whose action 
the laws of Kepler necessarily result, and which most corre- 
spond with these phenomena, since these laws corresponded to 
and predicted them." The discovery of such a force, the ex- 
istence of which Newton has developed in his immortal work, 
the Principia (which comprise the general sciences of nature), 
was almost simultaneous with the opening of the new paths to 
greater mathematical discoveries by means of the invention of 
the infinitesimal calculus. Intellectual labor shows itself in 
all its exalted grandeur where, instead of requiring external 
material means, it derives its light exclusively from the sources 
opened to pure abstraction by the mathematical development 
of thought. There dwells an irresistible charm, venerated by 
all antiquity, in the contemplation of mathematical truths — 
in the everlasting revelations of time and space, as they reveal 

* Cosmos, vol. i., p. 163. The dispute regarding priority as to the 
knowledge of the Earth's compression, in reference to a memoir read 
by Huygens in 1669 before the Paris Academy, was first cleared up by 
Delambre in his Hist, de VAstr. Mod., t. i., p. lii., and t. ii., p. 558. 
Richer's return to Europe occurred indeed in 1673, but his work was 
not printed until 1679; and as Huygens left Paris in 1682, he did not 
write the Addiiamentum to the Memoir of 1669, the publication of which 
was very late, until he had already before his eyes the results of Rich- 
er's Pendulum Experiments, and of Newton's great work, Philosophia 
Naiuralis Principia Mathematica. 

t Bessel. in Schumacher's Jahrhnch fur 1843, s. 32. 



352 COSMOS. 

themselves in tones, numbers, and lines * The improvement 
of an mtellectual instrument of research — analysis — has pow- 
erfully accelerated the reciprocal fructification of ideas, which 
is no less important than the rich abundance of their creations. 
It has opened to the physical contemplation of the universt 
new spheres of immeasurable extent in the terrestrial and ce- 
lestial regions of space, revealed both in the periodic fluctua- 
tions of the ocean and in the varying perturbations of the 
planets. 



RETROSPECT OF THE EPOCHS THAT HAVE BEEN SUCCESSIVELl 
CONSIDERED.— INFLUENCE OF EXTERNAL OCCURRENCES ON THE 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE RECOGNITION OF THE UNIVERSE AS ONE 
WHOLE.— MULTIPLICITY AND INTIMATE CONNECTION OF THE SCIEN- 
TIFIC EFFORTS OF RECENT TIMES.— THE HISTORY OF THE PHYSIC- 
AL SCIENCES BECOMES GRADUALLY ASSOCIATED WITH THE HISTa 
RY OF THE COSMOS. 

I APPROACH the termination of my bold and difficult under- 
taking. Upward of two thousand years have been passed in 
review before us, from the early stages of civilization among 
the nations who dwelt around the basin of the Mediterranean 
and the fruitful river valleys of Western Asia, to the begin- 
ning of the last century, to a period, therefore, at which gen- 
eral views and feelings were already beginning to blend with 
those of our own age. I have endeavored, in seven sharply- 
defined sections, forming, as it were, a series of as many sep- 
arate pictures, to present a history of the physical contem- 
plation of the universe, or, in other words, the history of the 
gradual development of the knowledge of the universe as a 
whole. To what extent success may have attended the at- 
tempt to apprehend the mass of accumulated matter, to seize 
on the character of the principal epochs, and to indicate the 
paths on which ideas and civilization have been advanced, can 
not be determined by him who, with a just mistrust of his re- 
maining powers, is alone conscious that the image of so great 
an undertaking has been present to his mind in clear though 
general outlines. 

At the commencement of our consideration of the period 
of the Arabs, and in beginning to describe the powerful in 
fluence exercised by the admixture of a foreign element in 
European civilization, I indicated the limits beyond whicl? 
the history of the Cosmos coincides with that of the physical 

* WUhelm von Humboldt, Gesammelte Werke, bd. i., s. 11. 



GENERAL RETROSPECT. 353 

Bcieilces. According to my idea, the historical recognition of 
the gradual extension of natural science in the two spheres 
of terrestrial and celestial knowledge (geography and astrono- 
my) is associated with certain periods and certain active intel- 
lectual events, which impart a peculiar character and coloring to 
those epochs. Such, for instance, were the undertakings which 
led Europeans into the Euxine, and permitted them to con- 
jecture the existence of another sea-shore beyond the Phasis ; 
the expeditions to tropical lands rich in gold and incense ; the 
passage through the Western Straits, or the opening of that 
great maritime route on which were discovered, at long inter- 
vals of time, Cerne and the Hesperides, the northern tin and 
amber lands, the volcanic islands of the Azores, and the New 
Continent of Columbus, south of the ancient settlement of the 
Scandinavians. To the consideration of the movements which 
emanated from the basin of the Mediterranean, and the most 
northern part of the neighboring Arabian Gulf, and of the ex- 
peditions on the Euxine and to Ophir, succeed, in my histor- 
ical delineation, the campaigns of the Macedonian conqueror, 
and his attempts to fuse together the west and the east ; the 
influence exercised by Indian maritime trade and by the Alex- 
andrian Institute under the Ptolemies ; the universal dominion 
of the Romans under the Csesars ; and, lastly, the taste evinc- 
ed by the Arabs for the study of nature and of natural forces, 
especially with reference to astronomy, mathematics, and prac 
tical chemistry, a taste that exercised so important and bene- 
ficial an influence. According to my view, the series of events 
which suddenly enlarged the sphere of ideas, excited a taste 
for the investigation of physical laws, and animated the efforts 
of men to arrive at the ultimate comprehension of the uni- 
verse as a whole, terminated with the acquisition of an entire 
hemisphere which had till then lain concealed, and which con- 
stituted the greatest geographical discovery ever made. Since 
this period, as we have already remarked, the human mind 
has brought forth great and noble fruits without the incite- 
ment of external occurrences, and, as the effect of its own in- 
herent power, developed simultaneously in all directions. 

Among the instruments which man formed for himself, like 
new organs, as it were, to heighten his powers of sensuous 
perception, there was one which exercised an influence similar 
to that of some great and sudden event. By the power of 
penetrating space possessed by the telescope, considerable poi- 
tions of the heavens were almost at once explored, the num- 
ber of known heavenly bodies was increased, and attempts 



354 COSMOS. 

made t) determine their forms and orbits. Mankind now 
first attamed to the possession of the " celestial sphere" of the 
Cosmos. Sufficient foundation for a seventh section of the 
history of the contemplation of the universe seemed to he af- 
forded by the importance of the acquisition of this celestial 
knowledge, and of the unity of the efibrts called forth by tho 
use of the telescope. If we compare another great invention, 
and one of recent date, the voltaic pile, with the discovery of 
this optical instrument, and reflect on the influence which it 
has exercised on the ingenious electro-chemical theory ; on 
the production of the metals ; of the earths and alkalies ; and 
on the long-desired discovery of electro-magnetism, we are 
brought to the consideration of a series of phenomena called 
forth at will, and which, by many different paths, lead to a 
profound knowledge of the rule of natural forces, but which 
constitute rather a section in the history of physical science 
than a direct portion of the history of cosmical contemplation. 
It is this multiplied connection between the various depart- 
ments of modern knowledge that imparts such difficulty to the 
description and limitation of its separate branches. We have 
very recently seen that electro-magnetism, acting on the di- 
rection of the polarized ray of light, produces modifications 
like chemical mixtures. Where, by the intellectual labors 
of the age, all knowledge appears to be progressing, it is as 
dangerous to attempt to describe the intellectual process, and 
to depict that which is constantly advancing as already at the 
goal of its efibrts, as it is difficult, with the consciousness of 
one's own deficiencies, to decide on the relative importance 
of the meritorious efforts of the living and of the recently de- 
parted. 

In the historical considerations I have almost every where, 
in describing the early germs of natural knowledge, designated 
the degree of development to which it has attained in recent 
times. The third and last portion of my work will, for the 
better elucidation of the general picture of nature, set forth 
those results of observation on which the present condition of 
scientific opinions is principally based. Much that, accord- 
ing to other views than mine, regarding the composition of a 
book of nature, may have appeared wanting, will there find 
its place. Excited by the brilliant manifestation of new dis- 
coveries, and nourishing hopes, the fallacy of which often con- 
tinues long undetected, each age dreams that it has approxi- 
mated closely to the culminating point of the recognition and 
comprehension of nature. I doubt whether, on serious reflec* 



GENERAL RETROSPECT. 355 

tion, such a belief will tend to heighten the enjoyment of the 
present. A more animating conviction, and one more conso- 
nant with the great destiny of our race, is, that the conquests 
already achieved constitute only a very inconsiderable por- 
tion of those to which free humanity will attain in future ages 
by the progress of mental activity and general cultivation. 
Every acquisition won by investigation is merely a step to the 
attainment of higher things in the eventful course of human 
affairs. 

That which has especially favored the progress of knowl- 
edge in the nineteenth century, and imparted to the age its 
principal character, is the general and beneficial endeavor not 
to limit our attention to that which has been recently acquir- 
ed, but to test strictly, by measure and weight, all earlier ac- 
quisitions ; to separate certain knowledge from mere conject- 
ures founded on analogy, and thus to subject every portion of 
knowledge, whether it be physical astronomy, the study of 
terrestrial natural forces, geology, or archaeology, to the same 
strict method of criticism. The generalization of this course 
has, most especially, contributed to show, on each occasion, the 
limits of the separate sciences, and to discover the weakness 
of certain studies in which unfounded opinions take the place 
of certain facts, and symbolical myths manifest themselves 
under ancient semblances as grave theories. Vagueness of 
language, and the transference of the nomenclature of one 
science to another, have led to erroneous views and delusive 
analogies. The advance of zoology was long endangered, from 
the belief that, in the lower classes of animals, all vital actions 
were attached to organs similarly formed to those of the 
higher classes. The knowledge of the history of the develop- 
ment of plants in the so-called Cryptogamic Cormophytes 
(mosses and liverworts, ferns, and lycopodiaceaj), or in the still 
lower Thallophytes (alga3, lichens, and fungi), has been still 
more obscured by the supposed general discovery of analogies 
with the sexual propagation of the animal kingdom.* 

If art may be said to dwell within the magic circle of the 
imagination, the extension of knowledge, on the other hand, 
especially depends on contact with the external world, and 
this becomes more manifold and close in proportion with the 
increase of general intercourse. The creation of new organa 
(instruments ot observation) increases the intellectual and not 

* Schleideu, Grundzuge der wissenschaftlichen Botanik, th. i., 1845 
B. 152, th. ii., s. 76 ; Kunth, Lehrbuch der Botanik, th. i., 1847, s. 91-lPi 
uud 505. 



356 COSMOS. 

unfrequently the physical powers of ihan. More rapia than 
light, the closed electric current conveys thought and will to 
the remotest distance. Forces, whose silent operation in ele- 
mentary nature, and in the delicate cells of organic tissues, 
still escape our senses, will, when recognized, employed, and 
awakened to higher activity, at some future time enter within 
the sphere of the endless chain of means which enable man to 
subject to his control separate domains of nature, and to ap- 
proximate to a more animated recognition of the Universe aa 
a Whole 



y 



INDEX TO VCL II 



4.BABIS, the Magician, myth of his expe 
ditjons and " guiding" arrow, 143. 

Abdurrahman I. (Calif), his promotion of 
the study of botany, 217. 

Abeken, Rudolph, admirable work by, 
" Cicero, in his Letters," 31. 

Abelard, 248. 

Abul-Hassan Ali, of Morocco, an Arabian 
astronomer, 214. 

Abul Wefa, the Almagest of, 222. 

Acosta, Joseph, " Natural and Moral His- 
tory of the Indies," 259, 266, 280, 281, 
286, 289, 290. 

Adriaansz, Jacob, his claim to the discov- 
ery of the telescope discussed, 317-319. 

Adrian (Emperor), 175 ; visit to his vari- 
ous dominions, 182. 

Adulis, inscription of, 282. 

asiian, description of the Vale of Tempe, 
28 ; Natural History, 194. 

^olians. their mental characteristics, 143. 

-Etna, Mount, on the distance at which its 
eruptions are visible, 135, 136. 

A.frica, early colonization of its northern 
iioast, 119-121 ; early circumnavigation, 
127 ; settlements of the Phcenicians, 
132 ; earliest comparison of the African 
races with the Arian races and the In- 
dian aborigines, 165. 

Agathodajmon, 190. 

Agesinax, hypothesis of the marks on the 
moon's disk, 193. 

&amp;.li)ertus Magnus, 43, 91 , 229, 241, 243 ; his 
scientific researches and writings, 243, 
244 ; commendation of, by Dante, 244. 

Albinovanus, Pedo, heroic poem on the 
deeds of Germanicus, 36. 

\lbiruni (Arabian mathematician). Histo- 
ry of India by, 222. 

A^lexander the Great, magnitude of the in- 
fluence of his campaigns, 152, 153, 155 ; 
their rapidity, 155 ; unity and grandeur 
of his polity, 154 ; diversity of the coun- 
tries he traversed, 155, 157; views re- 
specting Alexandria and Bahylon, 171. 

Alexander of Aphrodisius, on distillation 
of sea-water, 194, 218, 272. 

Alexander VI. (Pope), his "line of de- 
markation," 277, 278. 

Alexandria, its commercial greatness, 
171 ; Alexandrian school of philosophy, 
121 ; its scientific characteristics, 174 ; 
museum and libraries, 175, 176 ; myth 
of the burning of its library, 211. 

Alhassen (Alhazen), Arabian geographer, 
213, 219, 246. 

AUiacus, Cardinal, his " Picture of the 
World," 245 247,208. 



Al-Mamun (Calif), translation "^f numer- 
ous works from the Greek, &amp;'.., 215; 
measurement of a degree, 223. 

Alphabets, ancient, investigation of, 141. 

Alphabetical writing, spread of, by the 
Phoenicians, its powerful influence on 
civilization and higher results, 128, 129. 

Amber coast, visited by the Phcenicians, 
its probable locality, 130 ; amber trade, 
its origin and extension, 131, 132. 

Amenemha III. formed Lake Mceris, 124. 

America, discovery of, its influence on 
men's imaginations, 64, 65, 260 ; on the 
physical and mathematical sciences, 
200, 201, 238-241, 273-301; accidental 
discovery by the Northmen, 230, 231 ; 
dates of its discovery by the Spaniards 
and Portuguese, 264-267 ; supposed dis- 
covery by Madoc, 235, 236 ; important 
results of trivial circumstances in its 
discovery, 262, 263 ; its discoverers and 
adventurers, Amerigo Vespucci, 239- 
301 ; Balboa, 266-270, 271 ; Columbus, 
260-285 ; Cortez, 270, 271, 296 ; Gama, 
263 ; accidents which led to the naming 
of America, 297-301. 

Anghiera, correspondence and writings 
of, 66, 260, 269, 282, 284-286, 298. 

Anglo-Saxon poem on the names of the 
Runes, 47. 

Animal Epos (the German), its genuine 
delight in nature, 47, 48. 

Antar, early Bedouin poem, 60, 61. 

Antoninus, Marcus Aurelius, his embassy 
to China, 187. 

Apollonius Myndius on comets, 167. 

ApoUonius of Perga, 179, 315; similarity 
of his " System of the W^orld" to that 
of Tycho Brahe, 312, 313. 

Apuleius, his conjectures on fossils, 189, 
195. 

Aquinas (St. Thomas), 244. 

Arabian Gulf, its geognostic phenomena, 
123. 

Arabs, their poetry, in relation to nature, 
60 ; its characteristics, 61 ; influence of 
their invasions on the advancement of 
the physical and mathematical sciences, 
200-228,241-244 ; their incursions, com- 
merce, &amp;c., 203; configuration of Ara- 
bia and its natural productions, 204, 205: 
their nomadic life as compared with 
that of the Scythians, 207, 208 ; inter- 
course with the Nestorians, 208 ; their 
knowledge of botany and the science of 
medicine, 210, 211 ; scientific qualifica- 
tions, 212, 213 ; their geographers, 213-&gt; 
215 ; repugnance to anatomy, 214, 215 , 



358 



COSiVIOS. 



valuable translations from Greek, Syr- 
inc, Indian, &amp;c.,215, 217; their botanists 
and school of medicine. 216 ; chemistry 
and pharmacy, 218-220 ; astronomy, 
221-224,287; algebra, 225-227 ; general 
results of tlieir scientific researches, 
227. 228. 

Arago on the magnifying power of Gali- 
leo's telescope, 303; true method of 
writing the history of science, 320 ; 
treatise on changing or periodic stars, 
330 ,• discovery of colored, polarization, 
332, 333. 

Archimedes, 179, 190 ; his " Catoptrica," 
193. 

Argonautic expedition to Colchis, elucida- 
tion of the myth, 144. 

Aristarchus of Samos, his correct knowl- 
edge of the Earth's structure, 109 ; of 
astronomy, 177 ; acquaintance of Co- 
pernicus with his writings, 310-313. 

Aristobulus, 156, 158. 

Aristotle, noble passage on the effect of 
natural scenery, 29; on Erapedocles, 
30 ; on Rameses the Great, 126 ; his idea 
of the proximity of India to the Pillars 
of Hercules, 152 ; on the advantages of 
political unity, 154; his doctrines and 
expositions, 160 ; Dante on, 160 ; his 
"Historia Animalium" and "Meteoro- 
logica," 160-163, 192, 196 ; his zoologic- 
al specimens and collection of books, 
163 ; anatomical dissection, 162 ; his 
school and leading followers, 163, 164 ; 
important results of his teaching, 174, 
175, 176 ; on the weight of the atmos- 
phere, 194 ; Arabic translations of, 215; 
letter of the Emperor Frederic II. on, 
215, 216 ; influence of his philosophy in 
the Middle Ages, 242, 243; imperfect 
ideas on attraction, 309, 310 ; inventor 
of retrograde spheres, 315. 

Aristyllus, early Alexandrian astronomer, 
177, 178. 

Aryabhatta, Indian mathematician, 187. 

Astrolabes, use of, in navigation, 255-262, 

Astronomy, knowledge of, by the Chalde 
ans, 167, 168; Greeks, 166, 167, 176-179 
Arabs, 220-223 ; observations by the dis 
coverers of America, 285-294 ; applica- 
tion of. to navigation, 255-262, 291-295 
brilliant progress from the discovery of 
the telescope, 301-307. 

Augustus, his collection of fossils, 195. 

Ausonius. descriptions of nature in his 
poem " Mosella," 35. 

Australia, discovery of, 272, 273. 

Avicenna, Zoological History of, 216; 
work on Materia Medica, 217. 

Avion us, Festus, writings of, 134. 

Bacon, Lord, " Instauratio Magna," 316 ; 

conjectures on atmospheric currents, 

339 
Bacoii, Roger, 43, 229, 241, 243, 318 ; his 

acientific writings and their influence on 

the extension of the natural sciences, 

244-246. 
B»lbc»i, Vasco Nunez de, his navigation of 

the Paciflc, 266-269, 271. 



Banana the), the ariena of Pliny, 159. 

Barometsr, invention of, 338 ; hypsomel 
rical uses, 339. 

Barros, Johannes, Portuguese historian, 
writings of, 240, 272, 291, 29.3. 

Basil the Great, simple and beautiful de- 
scription of Nature in his letter to Greg- 
ory of Nazianzum, 40, 41 ; his Hexaj- 
meron, 41. 

Behaim, Martin, of NUmberg, 239, 255, 269, 
291. 

Bembo, Cardinal, his ^tna Dialogus, 34, 
64 ; Historias Venetis, 64. 

Berghaus, Professor, on the extent of the 
Roman empire, 181. 

Beriguardi, Claudio, first observed the 
pressure of the atmosphere at varying 
altitudes, 338, 339. 

Bei^aldez, Andres, MS. writings of, 265. 

BhattiKavya, Indian poem, 53. 

Bles, Henry de, Flemish landscape paint- 
er, 88. 

Boccaccio, a reviver of the study of clas- 
sical literature, 248. 

Bockh on the " Adonis Gardens" of the 
ancients, 91 ; on the knowledge of the 
Pythagoreans of the " precession," 178. 

Bodner, Carl, fidelity of his drawings tc 
nature, 93. 

Boethius, Geometry of, 225. 

Boiardo, smaller poems of, 64. 

Boreas, meteorological myth of, 147. 

Botanical knowledge of the Arabs, 211, 
216; of the Mexicans, 274, 275. 

Brahmagupta, Indian mathematician, 187 

Brahmins and Brahminical districts, 169. 

Breughel, Johann, his fruit and flower 
pieces, 90. 

Brewster, Sir David, on Kepler's method 
of investigating truth, 327; important 
discovery of the connection between 
the angle of complete polarization and 
the index of refraction, 332 ; on the date 
of Newton's optical discoveries, 333. 

Breytenbach, Bernhard von, early travel- 
er, 78. 

Bril, Matthew and Paul, Flemish land 
scape painters, 88. 

Brongniart, Alexander, palseontological 
researches of, 348. • 

Bruchium, Library of, 175. 

Bucolic poetry, its characteristics, 26. 

Buftbn, 75 ; deficiency of personal cbserv. 
ation in his writings, 75. 

Bunsen, Chevalier, note from his " Egypt," 
125. 

Byron, Lord, his poetry, 76. 

Cabot, Sebastian, voyages and discoverios 
of, 264, 265, 279, 280. 

Cabral, Alvarez, 240, 263. 

Cabrillo, Rodriguez, 230, 272. 

Caesar, Julius, writings of, 35, 38, 196. 

Calderon, dazzling description of nature 
in his writings, 73. 

Callimachus, gloomy descriptions of Na- 
ture in his " Hymn on Delos," 2€. 

Callislhenes of Olynthus, 163, 164, 166. 

Camoens, faithful individuality of nature 
in his " Lusiad," and its inimitable d*' 



INDEX. 



359 



Bcription of physical phenomena, 68- 
71. 

Canary Islands, regarded by Don Fernan- 
do, son of Columbus, as the Cassiteri- 
des of the Carthaginians, 132, 133 ; sup- 
posed " happy islands" of the ancients, 
133, 134 ; early notices of, 134, 135. 

Caravan trade of the Phoenicians, 130 ; of 
Western Asia, 170, 171 ; Egypt, 171, 172. 

Cardanus, Hieronymus, writings of, 260, 
261. 

Carthage, its geographical site, 120 ; nav- 
igation, 132 ; greatness, 149. See Phoe- 
nicians. 

Carus on the tone of mind awakened by 
landscape, 89. 

Caspian Sea, 145 ; Chinese expedition to, 
183. 

Cassini, Dominicus, his observations on 
Saturn's ring, 323, 329 ; zodiacal hght, 
329. 

Cassius, Mount, the probable " amber 
coast" of the Phoenicians, 130. 

Castilian heroic ages, impulses of, 65. 

Castor, Antonius, botanical gardens of, 
195. 

Catlin on the language and descent of the 
Indian tribe of the Tuscaroras, 236. 

Caucasus, Grecian myths respecting, 144. 

Celto-Irish poems, 48. 

Cervantes, his Don Quixote and Galatea, 
68, 71. 

Chasrcmon, his remarkable love of nature 
compared by Sir William Jones to that 
of the Indian poets, 28. 

Chaldean astronomers and mathemati- 
cians, 167, 177. 

Charlemagne, Arabian presents sent to, 
220. 

Charles V., letter to Cortez, 270. 

Chateaubriand, Auguste de, 75-77. 

Chemistry, pneumatic, dawn of, 344-346 ; 
chemical knowledge of the Romans, 
194 ; of the Arabs, 211, 212, 217, 218. 

Childrey, first observed the zodiacal light, 
329. 

Chinese, their pleasure gardens, and pas- 
sages from their writers on the subject, 
103-105 ; antiquity of their chronology, 
114, 115 ; warlike expedition to the Cas- 
pian, 186 ; Iloman embassy to China, 
187 ; early use of the magnetic needle, 
191, 253 ; of movable types in printing, 
249. 

Chivalric poetry of the thirteenth centu- 
ry, 46. 

Christianity, results of its diffusion in the 
expansion of the views of men, in their 
communion with nature, 38, 39 ; its hu- 
manization of nations, 199. 

Chrysostom, his eloquent admiration of 
nature, 43. 

Cicero on the golden flow of Aristotle's 
eloquence, 29; his keen susceptibility 
for the beauties of nature, 31, 32 ; on 
the ennobling results of its contempla- 
tion, 197, 198. 

Cimento, Accademia del, scientific re- 
searches of, 337-343. 

Ciwilization, early centers of, 115, 117, 123. 



Classical literature, why so termed, 180 ; 
influence of its revival on the contem- 
plation of nature, 248, 249. 

Claude Lorraine, his landscapes, 89, 96. 

Claudian, quotation from, on the domin- 
ion of the llomans, 198. 

Colseus of Samos, his passage through the 
Pillars of Hercules into the Western 
Ocean, 150, 151, 152. 

Colchis, Argonautic expedition to, 144, 
145. 

Colebrooke on the epochs of the Indian 
mathematicians, 187 ; on the incense ol 
Arabia, 204, 205 ; Arabic translation of 
Diophantus, 224. 

Colonna, Vittoria, her poems, 64. 

Columbus, peculiar charm lent to his de- 
lineations of nature, 65 ; their religious 
sentiment, 65 ; their beauty and sim- 
plicity, 66; his acute and discriminating 
observation of nature, 66, 67; his dream 
on the shore of Veragua, 67 ; letter to 
Queen Isabella, 78 ; on the land of 
Ophir, 138 ; visit to Iceland, 238 ; died 
in the belief that the lands discovered 
in America were portions of Eastern 
Asia, 239, 264, 265 ; made use of the 
writings of Cardinal Alliacus, 247, 251 ; 
his letter to Ferdinand and Isabella, on 
the coa.st of Veragua, 251 ; on his knowl- 
edge of the log. 257 ; scientific charac- 
teristics, 263, 264, 274 ; erroneous views 
on the extent of the Old Continent, 267- 
269 ; heraldic bearings bestowed on, 
270 ; physical observations in his letter 
from Haiti, October, 1498, 276 ; discov- 
ery of the magnetic line of no variation, 
278, 279 ; first described the equatorial 
current, 283, 284; the Mar de Sargasso, 
285 ; on the method of taking a ship's 
reckoning, 293, 294. 

Compass, its discovery and employment, 
253-255 ; transmission through the 
Arabs to Europe from the Chinese, 
253-255. 

Conquista, affe of the, great events it era- 
braced, 296. 

Conquistadores, impulses which animated 
them, 271. 

Copernicus, 301; greatness of his epoch, 
303 ; his life and studies, 304, 305 ; grand- 
eur of his views, and boldness of his 
teaching, 305-308 ; his eloquent de- 
scription of his system, 307, 308 ; knowl 
edge of the ideas of the ancients on the 
structure of the universe, 310, 311. 

Cortenovis, Father Angelo, story related 
by, on the tomb of Lars Porsena, 139, 
140. 

Cortez, Hernan, expeditions of, 270, 271, 
296. 

Cosa, Juan de la, map of the world, 263, 
265, 298. 

Cosmas Indicopleustes, 188, 189, 272. 

Cosmos, its science and history discrim- 
inated, 106, 108. 

Coupvent and Dumoulin on the height 
of the Peak of Teneritte, J 35. 

Covilham, Pedro de, and Alonso de Pavya, 
embassy to Prester John, 252 



30 J 



COSMOH 



Creuzer on the " Adonia Gardets" of the 
ancients, 92. 

Crusades, slightness of their influence on 
the Minnesingers, 47. 

Otesias, his account of an Indian spring, 
138 ; on the relations between Uglitning 
and conducting metals, 140 ; on India, 
154, 156, 158. 

Cteeibus, hydraulic clock of, 179, 220. 

Curtius, fine natural picture in his writ- 
ings, 36. 

Cuss, Nicholas de, a German cardinal, re- 
vived the doctrine of the Earth's rota- 
tion on its axis, and ti'anslation in space, 
109. 

Cuvier, his life of Aristotle, 160-162 ; on 
the scientific merits of Frederic IL, 244 ; 
palaeontological researches, 348. 

Cuyp, his landscapes, 89. 

Pante, "southern stars," quotation, 20: 
instances of his deep sensibiUty to the 
charms of nature, 63 ; notices in his po- 
etry—on Aristotle, 160; on Albertus 
Magnus, 244 ; on the magnetic needle, 
254 ; on the constellation of the South- 
ern Cross, 288-290. 

Darwin, Charles, vivid pictures in his 
writings, 80. 

Delille, his poems on nature, 80. 

Dschayadeva, Indian poet, his " Gitago- 
vinda," 53, 54. 

Diaz, Bartholomew, his discovery of the 
Cape of Good Hope, 252. 

Dicaearchus, diaphragm of, 152, 177. 

DIcuil, Irish monk, his work " De Mensu- 
ra Orbis Terras," 235. 

Diodorus on the Gardens of Semiramis, 
101 ; praise of the Etruscans, 140. 

Diophantus, the arithmetician and alge- 
braist, 183, 187. 224. 

^ioscorides of Cilicia, botanical investiga- 
tions ot; 182, 194, 195, 204, 210. 

Distillation of a fluid, first mention of, 
162. 

Di&gt;rians, their mental characteristics, 143 ; 
migrations, 148-150. 

Drummond's incandescent lime-ball, 325. 

Dscheber (Djaber), Arabian chemist, 209, 
218. 

Duran, D. Augustiu, his Romancero, 72. 

Ebn-Junis, first employed a pendulum to 
measure time, 219, 220 ; his astronom- 
ical observations, 222, 223. 

Eckhout, his large pictures of tropical 
productions, 92. 

Eginhard on the Arabian clock sent to 
Charlemagne, 220. 

Egypt, its chronological data, 114, 115, 
123-128; civilization, 125-128 ; monu- 
ments of its kings, 124 ; victories and 
distant expeditions of Rameses Mia- 
moun, 124-126; Egjrptian navigation, 
125-128 ; foundation of a permanent 
foreign commerce introduced with 
Greek hired troops, and its results, 127, 
128, 138 ; its greatness under the Ptol- 
emies, 170, 179 ; intercourse with dis- 
imt countries, 171-174. 



Ehrenberg on the incense and myrrh ot 
Arabia, 204, 205 

Elcano, Sebastian de, completed the first 
circumnavigation of the globe after the 
death of Magellan, 270. 

Electrical science, gradual dawn cf, 341- 
344. 

Elephants, African and Indian, 174 ; im« 
mense armies of, 174. 

El-Istachri, Arabian geographer, 213. 

ElUptic movement of the planets, discov- 
ery of, 314-317. 

Elmo, St., fire of, 69. 

Elysium, or " Islands of the Blessed" of 
the ancients, 134. 

Empedocles, his poems " on Nature," 24. 

Encke, Professor, on the distance at which 
eruptions of ^tna are visible, 136. 

Encyclopasdic scientific works of the Mid- 
dle Ages, 246. 

Epochs, early comparisons of, among civ- 
ilized nations, 114, 115. 

Epochs, great, in the advancement of hu- 
man knowledge, 303, 316. 

Equatorial current, first described by Co- 
lumbus, 283, 284. 

Eratosthenes, 152, 154, 156, 188; on the 
number of peninsulas in the Mediterra- 
nean, 120 ; his geographical labors, 176, 
177 ; conjecture of the equal level of the 
whole external sea, 177 ; measurement 
of degrees, 177 ; enlarged physical and 
geognostic opinions, i76-178, 196. 

Ercilla, Don Alonso de, his Epic poem 
" Araucana," 71, 72, 266, 285. 

Eric Upsi, first bishop of Greenland, 232. 

Etruscans, the, their inland trafiic, 139 ; 
influence of their character on Rome, 
and her political institutions, 139 ; their 
notice of the meteorological processes 
of nature, 139, 140. 

Euclid. 179. 

Eudoxus, his attempted circumnaviga- 
tion of Cyzicus, 127. 

Euripides, picturesque descriptions of na- 
ture in his writings, 25, 26 ; prophecy 
in the chorvis of his Medea, 182. 

Eutocius, method of. See Numerals. 

Everdingen, his landscapes, 89, 96. 

Eyck, Hubert and Johann van, landscapes 
in their paintings, 87. 

Fabricius, Johann, first observed the solar 
spots, 324, 325. 

Falero, Ruy, Portuguese astronomer, 293. 

Faraday, investigations on dia-magnetic 
substances, 334, 335 ; discovery of the 
evolution of light by magnetic force, 
336, 343. 

Ferdinandea, volcanic island of, 120. 

Finnish tribes, their poetry, in relation to 
nature, 56. 

Firdusi, Persian poet, 55 ; myth of the or- 
igin of the cypress in Paradise, 101. 

Flemming, Paul, old German poet, 76, 77 

Forster's " Delineations of the South Sea 
Islands," its effect on the author's mind, 
20; his translation of Sacontala, 50; his 
merits as a writer, 80. 

Frederic II. of Hohenstaufen, letter of, to 



INDEX. 



30 



his universities, on the translation of 
Aristotle, 215, 216 ; intercourse witii 
Arabian and Spanish literati, 217 ; curi- 
ous piece of mechanism presented to 
him, 220, 221 ; researches in natural 
history, 244. 

Freytag, remark on the Arabic poetry, 61. 

Fulgatores, the, of the Etruscans, 139, 
140. 

Galen of Pergamus, his scientific research- 
es, 182, 183, 194. 

Galileo, 219, 318, 319 ; his telescopic dis- 
coveries, 318-331 ; of the mountains in 
the moon, 319, 320 ; satellites of Jupi- 
^ter, 320-323 ; ring of Saturn, 323 ; solar 
spots, 324, 325 ; crescent shape of Ve- 
nus, 325, 326; conjectures on nebuljB, 
331 ; his invention of the binocular tel- 
escope, 323; thermoscopes, 337 ; on the 
origin of the trade winds, 339. 

Galle, Dr., on the constellation of the 
Southern Cross, 290, 291. 

Gardens, pleasure derived from, 103 ; ar- 
rangement, 104 ; extent and character 
of the Chinese gardens, 103 ; Roman, 
195. 

Gaseendi on Copernicus, 304, 312; on the 
similarity of tiie systems of Apollonius 
of Perga and Tycho Brahe, 312, 313. 

Gauss, Frederic, 337. 

Geography as blended with national 
myths, 121, 122. 

Geographies, maps and charts of the an- 
cients and the writers of the Middle 
Ages — Universal Geography of Eratos- 
thenes, 176-178 ; "Map of the World" 
of Hipparchus, 178 ; Geographies— of 
Strabo, 187-190 ; of Claudius Ptolemae- 
us, 190-193 ; of El-lstlchri and Alhas- 
een, 213, 214 ; of Dicuil, 235 ; of Alber- 
tus Magnus, 243, 244 ; Picture of the 
World of Cardinal Alliaco, 246 ; plani- 
epherium of Sanuto, 252, 253 ; sea-chart 
of Paolo ToscanelU, 261, 262 ; map of 
the world by Juan de la Cosa, 263 ; 
World-Apple of Martin Behaim, 269 ; 
hydrography of Joh. Rotz, 272 ; varia- 
tion chart of Santa Cruz, 280. 

G6rard, his illustrations to the "Lusiad" 
of Camoens, 70. 

Jermanic nations, their poetry, 44-46; 
love of nature in the Minnesingers, 45, 
4^; their "Animal Epos," its genuine 
delight in nature, 47, 48. 

Gibbon, his estimate of the extent of the 
Roman empire, 181 ; on the nomadic 
life of the Arabs as compared with that 
of the Scythians, 207, 208. 

Gilbert, William, of Colchester, on the 
compass, 279, 280 ; magnetic discover- 
ies, 334 ; observations on electricity, 
341 342. 
Gilbert, Sir Humphrey, 284, 285. 
Giorgione, 88. 

Gobar (Arabian "dust- writing"), 226. 
Goethe, his fine distichs on the appear- 
ance of Forster's translation of the Sa- 
contala, 51; profound veneration for 
Nature in his works, 82. 



Vol. II.— Q 



Gold-sand, region of, in Northern Asia, ita 
locality, 147, 148. 

Goldstiicker, Herr Theodor, MS. Notei 
on Indian Literature, 51-54. 

Gravitation, general discovery of, 309, 310. 

Greece, peculiar charm of its scenery, 
25, 143 ; heightened by its deeply-in- 
dented shore-line, 25, 143. 

Greeks, infrequency of a poetic treatment 
of nature in their writings, 22 ; mythic- 
al treatment of the vegetable world, 25 ; 
decay of the true Hellenic poetry in the 
time of Alexander, 26 ; deep feeling 
for nature in the Greek anthology, 27 ; 
Greek prose writers, 28, 29 ; Greek fa- 
thers, descriptions of Nature in their 
writings, 40-43 ; landscape painting, 82- 
86 ; Greek language, its magical power 
over all kindred and foreign nations, 
110, 111; their voyages of discovery, 
120 ; intercourse with Egypt, 127, 128, 
142; mental characteristics of the Greek 
races, 143 ; their early maritime expe- 
ditions, 120, 143, 144 ; elucidation of the 
myths of the Argonautic expedition, 
Prometheus, lo, and others, 144-147; 
colonies, 148-150 ; mental and artistical 
cultivation, 149, 150 ; important results 
of the campaigns of Alexander, 153-169, 
192 ; celebrated scientific writers, 182, 
183 ; revival of the study of Greek li^ 
erature in the Middle Ages, 247-249. 

Gregory of Nazianzum, letter of Basil the 
Great to, 40, 41 ; his beautiful poem 
" On the Nature of Man," 41. 

Gregory of Nyssa, plaintive expressions 
regarding nature in his writings, 42. 

Greenland, first colonization of, 231-233. 

Grimm, Wilhelm, on the Minnesingers, 
45, 46. 

Gudrun, old German Epos, 45. 

Guericke, Otto von, discoverer of the air 
pump, 342, 343. 

Guillen, Felipe, constructed the first vari- 
ation compass, 280, 293. 

Gunpowder, its invention discussed, 219. 

Hafiz, Persian poet, 55. 

Haller, his local descriptions, 77. 

Halley, Edmund, theory of four magnetic 
poles, 335 ; on the northern lights, 330 ; 
atmospheric currents, 340. 

Hamamat, sculptural inscriptions of, 126. 

Happy Islands of the ancients, 133. 

Hariot, Thomas, observations by, of the 
satellites of Jupiter, 321 ; on the solar 
spots, 324. 

Haroun Al-Raschid, curious clock pre- 
sented by, to the Emperor Frederic II., 
220. 

Heat, gradual investigations of its phenom- 
ena, 337-341. 

Hebrews, profound feeling for nature in 
their most ancient poetry, 22, 57-60 ; 
its special attraction for the nations of 
the West, 57; its characteristics, 57; 
its bold and faithful descriptions, 58. 

Hedschaz, Arabian tribe of, 203, 204, 207. 

Heeren on the circumnavigation of Libya 
126 ; on Madeira, 134 ; on Ophir, 137 



362 



COSMOS. 



writings of Ctesias, 156 ; extent of the 
Roman empire, 181. 

Hellenic. See Greece, Greeks. 

Helmont, Johann Baptiste von, one of the 
founders of pneumatic chemistry, 344. 

HeraclidsB, their return into Peloponne- 
sus, 148. 

Herculaneum, Pompeii, and Stabise, land- 
scape paintings discovered at, 85. 

Hernandez, physician to Philip II., 275. 

Herodotus, account of ancient paintings, 
83, 84 ; delight taken by Xerxes in tibe 
great plane-tree of Lydia, 102 ; his no- 
tices of the memorial pillars of the vic- 
tories of Rameses Miamoun, 124-126 ; 
notices on the circimmavigation of Lyd- 
ia, 127 ; of the expeditions and con- 
quests of Rameses Miamoun, 124-127 ; 
regarded Scythian Asia as a portion of 
Europe, 142; myth of Aristeas, 143 ; ac- 
curate knowledge of the configuration 
of the Caspian Sea, 145, 192 ; his de- 
scription of the Indian races, 164 ; ca- 
nal completed by Darius Hystaspes, 173. 

Herschel, Sir William, his discovery of 
the tvro innermost satelUtes of Saturn, 
329. 

Hesiod, his " Works and Days," 23 ; doc- 
trine of four ages of the world, 156. 

Hicetas of Syracuse, his knowledge of the 
earth's rotation on its axis, 109. 

Himerius the Sophist, Eclogues of, 27. 

Hippalus, 172. 

Hipparchus, his isthmus hypothesis, 127, 
266 ; the originator of astronomical ta- 
bles, and the discoverer of the preces- 
sion of the equinoxes, 178, 187. 

Hiram, ruler of Tyre, 136, 137. 

Hirt on the origin of the French style of 
gardening, 37. 

Historical events which have extended 
the horizon of the physical contempla- 
tion of the universe, 109, 110. 

Hiuen-thsang, eai'ly CMnese traveler, 148, 
250. 

Hiungnu (a Turkish race), migrations of, 
186, 202. 

Hobbima, landscapes of, 89. 

Hoces, Francisco de, discovery of Cape 
Horn, 265, 266. 

Uoffmeister, Dr., girth of the trunk of the 
Cedrus deodvara, 168. 

Hojeda, Alonso de, 240, 282, 298, 299. 

Homer and the Homeric songs, their 
beautiful and sublime descriptions of 
nature, 24, 46. 

Hooke, Robert, 310, 332; correct views 
on the rotation of the earth, 339, 340 ; 
observed the existence of nitrous par- 
ticles in the air, 345. 

Humboldt, Alexander von, works by, 
quoted in various notes : 
Ansichten der Natur, 96. 
Asie Centrale, 120, 138, 142, 144-147, 
152, 157, 161, 168, 173, 177, 189, 191, 
208, 214, 215, 232, 250, 282. 
De Distributione Geographic4 Plan- 

tarum, 158, 159. 
Essai Geognostique sur le Gisement 
des Rochea. 347. 



Essai Politique sur la Nouvelle £» 

pagne, 159, 271, 272, 280. 
Examen Critique de I'Histoire de la 
G§ographie, 92, 119, 121, 127, 134, 
136, 138, 152, 162, 165, 166, 177, 188, 
192, 194, 214, 215, 219, 225, 229, 235, 
236, 238, 239, 245, 246, 252, 256, 261» 
263-266, 269, 270, 276, 277, 282, 284- 
288, 290, 293, 297-299, 301. 
Recueil d'Observations Astronom- 

iques, 183. 
Relation Historique du Voyage aux 
Regions Equinoxiales, 20, 119, 131, 
135, 159, 236, 264, 290, 335, 339. 
Vues des Cordilleres, 156. 
Humboldt, Wilhelm von, comparison of 
the works of Lucretius with an Indian 
epic, 30, 31 ; the sky in the landscape 
compared in its effect to the charm of 
the chorus in the Greek tragedy, 100; 
irresistible charm of mathematical stud- 
ies, 351. 
Huygens, first explained the phenomena 
of Saturn's ring, 323, 329 ; on the nebu« 
Iffl in the sword of Orion, 330 ; his re- 
searches on light, 331-333. 
Hygrometers, invention of, 340, 341, 
Hyksos, the, their Semitic origin and mi- 
gration, 206, 207. 
Hyperboreans, the, meteorological myth 
of, 147. 

Ibn-Baithar, Arabian botanist, 216. 

Iceland, its discovery and colonization by 
the Northmen, 231 ; its early free eon- 
stitution and literature, 237. 

Ilschan Holagu, observatory founded by, 
223. 

Incense of Arabia, researches on the, 204, 
205. 

India, expedition of Alexander to, and ita 
important results on physical and geo- 
graphical science, 153-158. 

Indians, profound feeling of nature in 
their most ancient poetry, 22, 101 ; ita 
influence on the imagination of the East 
Arian nations, 44, 48-51 ; its character- 
istics, 51-54 ; their knowledge of land- 
scape painting, 84, 85 ; numerical sys- 
tem, 169, 225-227 ; their chemistry, 218, 
219 ; planetary tables, 222 ; algebra, 
224-227. 

Inductive reasoning, 179. 

Infinitesimal calculus, results of its inven- 
tion, 351. 

Ingolf, his colonization of Iceland, 231, 237. 

lonians, their mental characteristics, 14.3. 

Irish, conjectures on their early discovery 
of America, 234-237. 

Isabella, Queen, letters to Columbus, 274, 
293. 

Isaiah, quotation from his prophecies, 20S, 

Islands of the Blessed, myth of the an« 
cients, 133. 

ItaUan poetry, as descriptive of nature^ 
62-64. 

Ivory, commerce in, 174. 

Janaen, Zacharias, optical instnimenti 
invented by 318, 319. 



INDEX. 



363 



Job, book of, its impressive descriptions 
of the natural scenery of the East, 59, 60. 

John of Salisbury, 248. 

Jupiter, controversy on the discovery of 
his satellites, and marked influence of 
the discovery on the extension of the 
Copernican system, 320-322, 

Kalidasa, Indian poet, 50-54 ; his Sakun- 
tala, 50, 51, 85 ; Vikrama and Urvasi, 51, 
53 ; The Seasons, 51, 53, 74 ; Messenger 
of Clouds, 51, 53. 

Kepler, his eulogium on Copernicus, 307 ; 
ideas on gravitation, 310 ; great discov- 
ery of the elliptic motion of the planets 
round the sun, 314-317; astronomical 
writings, 317 ; on the papal prohibition 
of the Copernican system, 322 ; his 
great mental and scientific characteris- 
tics, 327; on comets and fixed stars, 
327-329 ; Brewster, Chasles, and La- 
place on his writings and theories, 327. 

Kien-long, Chinese emperor, descriptive 
poem by, 103, 104. 

Kirghis steppe, its extent and population, 
208. 

Klaproth, his researches on the Indo-Ger- 
manic races, 186; letter to Humboldt 
on the invention of the compass, 254. 

Klopstock, 76. 

Lagides, the. See Ptolemies. 

Lambrecht, his " Song of Alexander," 49. 

Laqdscape painting. See Painting. 

Languages, their value and importance in 
the history of the physical contempla- 
tion of the universe, 110-112. 

Laplace on Kepler's theory of the meas- 
urement of casks, 327 ; on the zodiacal 
light, 329. 

Las Casas, Bartholomew de, 261, 262, 299- 
301. 

Lassen, author's correspondence with, on 
the ariena of Pliny, 159 ; on the black 
Asiatic races, 165 ; on the incense of 
Arabia, 204, 205. 

Leibnitz, character of his Protogoea, 349, 
35a 

Leif, his discovery of America, 230, 231, 
234. 

Lepsius, his chronological data for Egypt, 
115, 124 ; on the monuments of the dis- 
tant expeditions of Ramescs Miamoun, 
125 ; on the Semitic written characters, 
129. 

Letronne on the Greek zodiac, 167; on 
the canal of the Red Sea, 173 ; on the 
epoch of Diophantus, 183 ; on the early 
discoveries of the Irish, 2:35. 

Llegnitz, Mongolian battle at, 202, 249. 

Lieu-tscheu, ancient Chinese writer, on 
the pleasure felt in the possession of 
gardens, 103. 

Light, gradual discovery of its phenome- 
na, 332, 333. 

Lippershey, Hans, his claims to the dis- 
covery of the telescope discussed, 317- 
319. 

Lister, early researches by, la palisontol' 
ogy, 348, 349. 



Livy, writings of, 35. 

Log, use of in navigation, and date of 'ta 

introduction, 256-258. 
Longinus, 166. 
Longus, his pastoral romance "Daphnis 

et Chloe," 28. 
Lonnrot, Ellas, collection of Finnish 

songs, 56. 
Lucan, vivid description of nature in hia 

works, 34. 
Lucius the younger, his didactic poem of 

iEtna, 34. 
Lucretius, his great poem "De Naturd," 

30, 31, 69. 
Ludius, ancient Roman painter, 84. 
Luis, Fray de Leon, description of night, 

72. 
Lully, Raymond, scientific acquirements 

of, 254, 255. 
Lusiad of Camoens, its truth to nature, 

68-71. 

Macedo, J. J. da Costa de, work on the 
discovery of the Canaries, 135, 

Macedonians, influence of their cam- 
paigns under Alexander the Great, 153, 
192. 

Macpherson's Ossian, 48. 

Madeira, supposed notice of in Plutarch, 
134. 

Madoc, western voyage of, 235, 236. 

Magellan, navigation and discoveries of, 
in the Pacific, 269, 270. 

Magellanic clouds,- first notices of, 286- 
288. 

Magnetism, observations and discoveries 
in the Middle Ages — of Columbus, 277- 
279; Cabot, 279, 280; Gassendi, 280; 
Robert Norman, 281, 335 ; modern re- 
searches — William Gilbert's, 334 ; Ara- 
go, 3.34; Faraday, 334, 336; Edmund 
Halley, 335 ; Frederic Gauss, 337 ; Ant- 
arctic expeditions, 335, 336. 

Mahabharata, Indian heroic poem, 50, 52, 
147, 156. 

Malus, discovery of polarization by, 332, 
343. 

Mandeville, John, his travels, 78 ; their 
characteristics, 251. 

Manetho, Egyptian dynasty of, 124. 

Marco Polo, his travels and admirable 
narrative, 250, 251 ; early editions of, 
and whether known to Columbus, 251. 

Marinus Sanuto, writings of, 252. 

Marinus of Tyre, his isthmus hypothesis, 
127, 266; raytii on the Indian Ocean. 
193 ; on the breadth of the Old Conti- 
nent, 268. 

Marius, Simon, on the invention af the 
telescope, 318; discovered the moons 
of Jupiter simultaneously with Galileo, 
320, 321 ; nebula in Andromedji, 331. 

Martel, Charles, on the results of his vic- 
tory over the Moslems at Tours, 202. 

Masudi, Arabian historian, account of tb^, 
remains of a ship of the Red Sea, 127. 

Materia Medica, Hindoo and Arabia 
knowledge of, 211. 

Mathematicians, Grecian, 164, 176-179; 
Babylonian, 167 ; Indian, 168, 224. 225 • 



364 



COSMOS. 



Arabic. 224 ; of the Middle Ages, 245, 
246, 255, 283 ; modem, 303-352. 

Mayow on the influence of nitrous parti- 
cles in the air, 345. 

Mediterranean, its geographical position 
and configuration, 119 ; its triple con- 
struction, 120, 121. 

Megasthenes, 155, 156 ; his descriptive ac- 
curacy, 156 ; embassies, 169. 

Meleager of Gadara, his Idyl " on Spring," 

lienander the Rhetorician, his severe crit- 
icism on the poems of Empedocles, 30. 

Messina, Antonio di, transplanted the pred- 
ilection for landscape painting to Ven- 
ice, 87. 

Microscope, its discovery and scientific 
results, 106, 318. 

Migration, direction of its early impulses, 
186, 187, 202. 

Miletus, 149. 

Milton, character of the descriptions of 
nature in his " Paradise Lost," 74. 

Minnesingers, love of nature as expressed 
in their poetry, 44-46. 

Minucius, Felix, early Christian writer 
on nature, 39. 

Missals, landscape illustrations in, 86. 

Mohammed, 206, 208. 

Mohammed Ben-Musa, his compendium 
of Algebra, 224. 

Mongolians, battle at Liegnitz, 202, 249 ; 
Buddhism, 202. 

Monsoon, Indian, causes of, 123. 

Monsoons, known to the companions of 
Alexander, 172. 

Mosaics, Byzantine, 86. 

Miiller, Johannes. See Regiomontanus. 

Miiller, Otfried, on the characteristics of 
the landscape paintings of the ancients, 
85 ; on the myth of the destruction of 
Lyktonia, 121; on national myths blend- 
ed witR history and geography, 121 ; 
date of the Doric immigration into the 
Peloponnesus, 124. 

Museum of Alexandria, 175, 176. 

Naddod, his discovery of Iceland, 230, 231. 

Nature, incitements to the study otj 19 ; 
inducements, three ditierent kinds, 19, 
20 ; i. Poetical descriptions of nature, 
21-82 ; ii. Landscape painting, 82-98, 
100 ; iii. Cultivation of tropical plants, 
99-105 ; powerful effect in after years 
of striking impressions in childhood, 
20; an increased impulse lent to the 
study of nature by the discovery of 
America, 65; modern descriptive and 
landscape poetry, 80, 81. 

Nautical astronomy, 255-262, 291-301. 

Nearchus, 156, 172. 

Neku, commenced the canal of the Red 
Sea, 173. 

Neophytes, numeral characters of, 226. 

Nestorians, their intercourse with the 
Arabs and Persians, and its results, 208, 
209. 

Newton, Sir Isaac, his invention of the 
mirror sextant, 292 ; discovery of the 
Uw of gravitation, 313, 316, 331, 350 



351 ; experiments on the velocity itt 
light, 333 ; early electrical experiment 

Niebelungen, absence of any description 
of natural scenery in, 45. 

NominaUsts, school of, in the iliddle 
Ages, 243. 

Nonnus, his Dionysiaca, 27. 

Norman, Robert, his invention of the dip- 
ping needle, 281, 335. 

North, natioas of, their love of nature, 44. 

Northmen, dates of their discovery and 
colonization of America, Greenland, 
and Iceland, 230-232. 

Numerals, Indian, 169 ; spread of, 225- 
227 ; early methods of expressing the 
multiplier of the liindamental groups, 
225-226 ; " Suanpan," " Method of Eu- 
tocius," "Gobar," Arabian "dust-writ- 
ing," characters of Neophytos, 225-227. 

Oceanic discoveries, 228-301. 

Omar, Calif, his religious toleration, 203L 
204. 

Onesicritus on the Indian fig-tree, 159; 
on the Indian races, 164. 

Ophir, conjecture on its locality jt36-138, 
its exports, 137. 

Oppianus of Cilicia, poem on fishes, 194. 

Optical instruments, dates of their discov- 
ery, 317-319; optical experiments of 
Claudius Ptolemaeus, 183, 193, 194. 

Osiander, Andreas, his preface to the 
writings of Copernicus, 306. 

Ossian and the Celto-Irish poems, 48. 

Ovid, his vivid pictures of nature, 33, 34. 

Oxygen and its properties, first notices 
of, 346. 

Pacific, discovery and navigation of, 266- 
273 ; its results on the extension of cos- 
mical knowledge, 267. 

Painting, Landscape, its influence on the 
study of nature, 82-98 ; early paintings 
of the Greeks, 83, 84 ; of the Romans, 
85,86; of the Indians, 84, 85 ; paintings 
found at Herculaneum, Pompeii, Sta- 
biffi, 85; missals and mosaics of Byzan- 
tine art, 86 ; Flemish school of the Van 
Eycks, 87 ; Venetian and Bolognese 
schools, 87, 88 ; Claude and the Land- 
scape painters, 89, 90 ; early paintings 
of tropical scenery, 90-92 ; advantages 
offered to the artist by the landscapes 
and vegetation of the tropics, 93-95 ; 
panoramas, dioramas, and neoramas, 
their scenic effect, 97, 98. 

Palaeontological science, dawn of, 347- 
349. 

Panoramas, more productive of effect 
than scenic decorations, 98 ; sugge* 
tions for their increase, 98. 

Pantschab, Chinese expedition under, to 
the shores of the Caspian, 186. 

Parks of the Persian kings, 101, 102. 

Pastoral romances, their defects, 68. 

Pendulum, earliest use as a time measur- 
er, 219 ; modern. 350. 

Persia, extension of its rule, 142. 

Persians, their poetry in relation to on- 



INDEX. 



365 



ture, 43, 44, 48, 49, 52-56, 101, 102 ; its 
characteristics, 54 ; the four paradises 
celebrated by the Persian poets, 54 ; 
parks of the Persian kings, 101. 

Petrarch, his sonnet "on the death of 
Laura," 63, 64 ; revival of the study of 
classical hterature, 248. 

fhoBnicians, their position among the 
non-Hellenic civilized nations, on the 
shores of the Mediterranean, their col- 
onies, commerce, and navigation, 119- 
139 ; use of w^eights and measures, and 
metallic coinage, 128 ; of alphabetical 
writing, 128, 129 ; extent of their navi- 
gation and caravan trade, 129-131, 136 ; 
amber trade, ^^1, 132. 

Pharmacy, chemical, first created by the 
Arabs, 211. 

Philostratus, his mention of ancient paint- 
ings, 84. 

Pigafetta, Antonio, nautical works of, 256- 
258, 286, 289, 292. 

Pindar, his descriptions of nature, 24. 

Pinturicchio, landscapes of, 87, 88, 

Pinzon, Martin Alonzo, his disputes with 
Columbus, 257, 262, 263. 

Plato, character of his descriptions of na- 
ture, 29-31 ; on landscape painting, 84 ; 
limits of the Mediterranean, 119 ; value 
of his doctrines in the Dark Ages, 176 ; 
misconceived dogmas, 241, 242 ; his 
ideas on attraction, 309, 310; on the 
structure of the universe, 314. 

Playfair, 75. 

Pliny the elder, his great work on Nature, 
36 ; its arrangement and style, 195-197; 
on the locality of the amber islands, 131 ; 
his description of the ariena (banana) of 
India, 1.59 ; on the benefits of civiliza- 
tion, 185. 

Pliny the younger, descriptions of nature 
in his letters, 32, 37, 38 ; on the " Histo- 
ry of Nature," by his uncle, 195, 196. 

Plutarch, notice of two Atlantic islands 
in his works, supposed to be Porto San- 
to and Madeira, 134 ; on the marks on 
the moon's disk, 193; work on "The 
Opinions of Philosophers," 311. 

Poetry, modern, descriptive, and land- 
scape, its defects, 80-82. 

Polarization of light, discovery of, 332. 

Polybius on the number of peninsulas in 
the Mediterranean, 120 ; on African and 
Indian elephants, 174. 

Polygnotus, paintings of, 83. 

Porsena, Lars, tradition on his tomb, 
139. 

Porto Santo, 134, 135. See Plutarch. 

Portuguese heroic ages, impulses of, 65 ; 
faithful mdividuality of nature in their 
great epic poet, Camoens, 68, 71. 

Posidonius, his comparison of the tides 
with the moon's supposed influence, 
152, 153. 

Post, Franz, his paintings of South Amer- 
ican landscapes, 90, 91. 

Poussin, Gaspard and Nicholas, their land- 
scapes, 89, 95. 

Printing, invention of, 249. 

Promemeus, myth of, 141. 



Psalms, the, their sublime poetic feeling 
for nature, 57, 58, 59. 

Ptolemseus, Claudius, on the locality of 
Sapphara, 136, 137 ; influence ot hia 
Universal Geography, its merits and 
defects, 190-192 ; researches on optical 
refraction, 183, 193, 194; geographical 
and mathematical knowledge, 183, 187, 
188 ; on the configuration of the Caspi- 
an, 192. 

Ptolemies, the, important result of theu 
rule in Egypt, 170-179 ; their inter- 
course with distant countries, 171-174 ; 
scientific expeditions, 174 ; peculiar 
character of the Ptolemaic period, 174 ; 
accessions to general knowledge, 176 ; 
to astronomical knowledge, 177-179 
mathematical investigations, 179. 

Ptolemy PhUadelphus, his restoration of 
the canal of Darius Hystaspes, 173 ; sci- 
entific researches, 173-175. 

Punic, see Carthage, Phoenicians ; Punio 
work on agriculture, 185. 

Pythagoreans, their views on the struc- 
ture of the universe, 109 ; on the mo- 
tion of the planets, 314-316. 

Quatremdre, Etienne, on the circumnav 
igation of Libya, 127 ; on the locality 
of Ophir, 137. 

Quinsay, Chinese city, as described by 
Rubruquis, 249, 250 ; erroneous views 
of Columbus on its geographical local- 
ity, 268, 269. 

Rachias, his embassy from Ceylon to 
Rome, 187. 

Rafn, Christian, American antiquities of, 
231, 233, 234. 

Ramayana, Indian heroic poem, 50, 52, 53. 

Rameses Miamoun, king of Egypt, his ex- 
peditions, victories, and achievements, 
124-126, 173. 

Razes, Arabian chemist, 218. 

Realists, school of, in the Middle Ages, 243. 

Red Sea, canal of, early attempts at its 
construction, 173. 

Regiomontanus (Johann Mtiller),255, 267, 
305; on the anatomical dissections of 
Aristotle, 163 ; on the drawings of pet 
rifactions by Scilla, 348 ; meteoroscope 
of, 255 ; astronomical ephemerides, 292. 

Reisch, Gregory, Margarita Philosophica, 
246, 297. 

Remusat, Abel, researches on the Indo- 
Gerraanic races, 186. 

Renaud, his researches on the intercourse 
of the Arabs and Persians with India, 
213. 

Bey, Jean, one of the founders of pneu- 
matic chemistry, 343 ; experiments by, 
345. 

Rhakotis, library of, 175. 

Ritter, Carl, his monograph on incense^ 
204. 

Romans, the, rarity of their poetic de« 
scriptions of nature, 29 , their land« 
scape paintings, 84-86 ; influence of 
their universal dominion, 180-199 ; e* 
tent of their empire and its diversity 



366 



COSMOS. 



181 ; tiieir expeditions and statistical 
labors, 182 ; (on the superior scientific 
knowledge of the Hellenic races, 183 ;) 
causes of the rise and fall of their uni- 
versal sway, 184 ; embassy to China, 
187; use of way-measurers in their nav- 
igation, 256, 257. 

Romer, Glaus, discovery of the measura- 
ble velocity of light, 333. 

Rosen, Friedrich, translated the Algebra 
of Mohammed Ben-Miisa, 224. 

Ross, Sir James Clark, Antarctic expedi- 
tion of, 336. 

Ross, Ludwig, on the early intercourse 
between Greece and Egypt, 128- 

Rousseau, Jean Jacques, 75, 76. 

Rubens, truth and vividness of his land- 
scapes, 90. 

RUckert, his translations from Eastern lit- 
erature, 54, 61. 

Rufus of Ephesus, early anatomist, 191. 

Ruisbrock (Rubruquis), travels o£ and 
results of his narrative, 249, 250, 264. 

Rumohr, Baron von, description of an 
early Psalter, 86 ; on conical forms of 
mountains in early Italian landscapes, 
87, 88. 

Ruth, book of, its naive simplicity, 60. 

Ruysdael, his landscapes, 89, 95. 

Sadi, Persian poet, 55. 

Ste. Croix, 154, 

St Pierre, Bemardin de, 46, 75, 76 ; inim- 
itable truth to nature of his writings, 
76, 77. 

Sanctorius, 220. 

Sanscrit language, its intermixture with 
the Greek, 111. 

Santa Cruz, Alonso de, his general varia- 
tion chart, 280 ; proposals for determin- 
ing longitudes, 293, 294. 

Saturn, gradual discovery of its ring, 323 ; 
Kepler's conjectures, 328 ; discovery of 
its satellites, 329. 

Scheiner, Christopher, his observations 
on the solar spots, 324, 325. 

Schiller on the rarity of descriptions of 
nature in the poetry of Greece, 21. 

Schiltberger, Hans, of Munich, early trav- 
eler, 78. 

Ochlegel, August Wilhelm von, 154, 
162. 

Schoner, Johann, of Nuremberg, calum- 
nies on Amerigo Vespucci, 297 ; super- 
intended the publication of the writ- 
ings of Columbus, 306, 307. 

Scilla, drawings by, of the petrifactions 
of Calabr a and Malta, 348. 

Scotus, Nicolaus, 229. 

Scylax of KaryanSa, explored the course 
of the Indus, 142. 

Scythians, the, investigations on their re- 
lationship to the Goths, 146. 

S6dillot, M., on the astronomical instru- 
ments of the Arabians, 214, 215, 222, 
223, 255. 

Bee-ma-kuang (early Chinese statesman), 
hijs poem of "the Garden," 104. 

Eeleucidee, 170. 

Btleucus of Babylon, h'^ correct knowl- 



edge of the Earth's structure, lOi, 310 
of astronomy, 178. 

Seleucus Nicator, 169, 171. 

Seneca, Etruscan Augur-theory, 140 , nar 
row confines of the earth, 152. 

S6vign6, Madame de, letters of, 76. 

Sextus Empiricus, 183. 

Shakspeare, powerful descriptions of nat 
ural scenery in his writings, 73, 74. 

Sidonians, their commerce, knowledge 
of astronomy, arithmetic, and naviga 
tion, 130. See Phoenicians. 

Sihus Itahcus, scenery of the Alps and It 
aly, 38. 

Simphciua, on the date of Babylonian as- 
tronomical notices, 115. 

Sismondi on Camoens, 70, 71 ; Er cilia, 72. 

Solis, Juan Diaz de, discovery of the Rio 
de la Plata, 269. 

Solomon, route of his maritime expedi 
tions, 136, 137. 

Sophocles, beautiful descriptions of na- 
ture in his " CEdipus Colonos," 25, 
102. 

Sodsa, Martin Alfonso de, botanic garden 
at Bombay, 275. 

Southern Cross, constellation of, early no- 
tices, 288-291. 

Spanish writers of the 16th century, char- 
acteristics of, 259-264. 

Staunton, Sir George, description of the 
imperial garden of Zhe-hol, 103. 

Steno on the substances contained in 
rocks, 347, 

Strabo on the Mediterranean coast-line, 
120 ; on Rameses the Great, 126 ; on 
the circumnavigation of Libya, 127 ; on 
the Sidonians, 130 ; on the Tyrian cit- 
ies of the Northwest Coast of Africa, 
132 ; Phoenician commercial settle- 
ments in the Persian Gult; 136 ; on the 
Turduli and Turdetani, 141 ; conjecture 
of undiscovered lands in the Northern 
hemisphere, 152 ; on the passage of Al- 
exander's army across the mountain- 
ous district of the Paropanisadae, 157 ; 
his great work on Geography, 187-190 ; 
supposed existence of another conti- 
nent between the west of Europe and 
Asia, 189, 268. 

Sturm, Johann Christian, discoverer of tho 
difi'erential thermometer, 340. 

Suanpan, Mogul reckoning machine, 225. 

Syracuse, 148, 149, 

Tacitus, descriptions of nature in his 

writings, 35, 36 ; acquaintance with the 

glessum of the shores of the Baltic, 131 ; 

discrimination of human races, 190. 
Tasso, his " Jerusalem Liberated," 68 ; 

stanza on the discovery of America, 

240, 
Tenerifle, volcano of, 135. 
Telescope, results of its invention, 301- 

303, 353 ; date of its accidental discov&lt; 

ery discussed, 317-319. 
Theocritus, his idyls, 26. 
Theophrastes, 183, 195. 
Thermometers, invention of, 337-33a, 
Thomson, his " Seasons," 74. 



INDEX. 



3G7 



Tibullus, his " Lustration of the Fields," 
34. 

Tieck, Liidwig, quotation from, on Cal- 
deron, 73 ; on Shakspeare, 73, 74. 

Timochares, early Alexandrian astrono- 
mer, 177, 178. 

11n, early commerce for, 130, 131. 

Titian, landscapes in his pictures, 88. 

Toledo, astronomical congress of, 223. 

Torricelli, his invention of the barometer, 
338. 

Toscanelli, letters of, 246, 251 ; sea-chart, 
261, 262 ; scientific acquirements, 267. 

Travels and travelers of the Middle Ages, 
78, 249-253, 259 ; character of their nar- 
ratives compared with those of modern 
times, 78, 79. 

Tropics, luxuriant beauty of the land- 
scapes, 97 ; cultivation of exotic plants, 
99-105 ; paintings of tropical scenery, 
90-92 ; why more accurate and beauti- 
ful paintings may be anticipated, 99; 
associations connected with descrip- 
tions of tropical scenery, 99. 

Troy, data of its destruction, 115. 

I'scheu-kung, early measurement of the 
length of the solstitial shadow, 115. 

Tsing-wang (Chinese emperor), use of 
the compass and "magnetic cars," 191, 
253. 

Tuscaroras, on the language and descent 
of, 236. 

Tycho Brahe, 109, 313, 316 ; his astro- 
nomical discovery of the " variation," 
222. 

Tyre, Tynans. See Phoenicians. 

Ukert on the amber trade of the ancients, 

131. 
Ulugh Beig, observatory and gymnasium 

founded by, 223. 

Vedas, Indian hymns, in praise of nature, 

50. 
Veg'jtation of the cold and tropical zones, 

9H.97. 



Venus, discoveiy of its crescent shape, 
325 326 

Vespucci, Amerigo, 239, 282, 286, 289, 292, 
294 ; peculiar charm lent to his deline- 
ations of nature, 65; examination of tha 
accidental causes which led to the nam- 
ing of the New World. 297-301. 

Vidal, Capt, height of the Peak of Tene- 
riffe, 135. 

Vincentius of Beauvais, 229, 241 ; hi« 
" Mirror of Nature," 246, 253, 254. 

Vinci, Leonardo da, landscape in his pic- 
ture of Mona Lisa, 88 ; attainments in 
physical science, 283; on the ash-col- 
ored light of the moon, 320 ; geognos- 
tic conjectures, 347. 

Vinland, early American settlement of 
the Northmen, 230-232, 238. 

Virgil, beauty of his descriptions of na- 
ture, 32, 33. 

Vitruvius, 85. 98, 256. 

Voltaic pile, its discovery compared with 
that of the telescope, 354. 

Voltaire on the "Araucana" of Ercilla, 
71, 72. 

Vossius, Isaac, researches on light, 333. 

Waagen, Professor, notes on early paint- 
ings, 86, 87. 

Warahamihara, Indian mathematician, 
187. 

Wellsted, first reported the existence of 
three mountain chains in Arabia, 205. 

Weilauff on the amber trade, 131. 

Xenophanes, his geognostic conjectures, 
189. 

Yemen, its natural products, 204, 205. 
Young, Thomas, his discovery of the in« 
terference of light, 332, 343. 

Zeni, the Fratelli, travels of, 238. 
Zodiacal light, its discovery and scientifi* 

results, 329, 330. 
Zuniga, Juana de, wife of Cortez, 271. 



K!fD or VOL. U. 



fr I i J 



r l;i 



1 

i 



i 
I' 