COSMOS: 



A SKETCH 



A PHYSICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE UNIVERSE. 



ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT, f ^^l" ^^^ ' 



TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN, 

BY E. C. OTTE AND B. H. PAUL, Ph. D., F.C.S. 



Naturse vero rerum vis atque majestas in omnibus mc mentis fide caret, si quis modo 
partes ejus ac non totam complectatur animo. — Plin., Hist, Nat., lib. yii., c. 1. 



VOL. IV 



NEW YORK: 

HARPER &amp; BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS, 
329 &amp; 331 PEARL STREET, 

FRANKLIN SQUARE. 

186G. 



v:4 






SUMMARY. 



Vols. III. and IV. 

GENERAL SUMMARY OF THE CONTENTS. 

Special Results of Observation in the Domain of Cosmical Phenomena.^ 
Introduction. 
Retrospect of the subject. Nature considered under a two-fold as 
pect : in the pure objectivity of external phenomena, and in their inner 
reflection in the mind. A significant classification of phenomena leads 
of itself to their casual connection. Completeness in the enumeration 
of details is uot intended, at least in the representation of the reflected 
picture of nature under the influence of the creative power of imagina- 
tidn. Besides an actual or external world, thei-e is produced an ideal 
or an inner world ; filled with physical symbolic myths, difierent ac- 
cording to race and climate, bequeathed for centuries to subsequent 
generations, and clouding a clear view of nature. Fundamental im- 
perfectibility of the knowledge of cosraical phenomena. The discovery 
oi empirical laws, the insight into the causal connection of phenomena, 
description of the universe, and theory of the universe. How, by means 
of existing things, a small part of their genetic history is laid open. Dif- 
ferent phases of the theory of the universe, attempts to comprehend the 
order of nature. Most ancient fundamental conception of the Hellenic 
mind : physiologic phantasies of the Ionian school, germs of the scien- 
tific contemplation of nature. Double direction of the explanation of 
natural phenomena, by the assumption of material principles (elements), 
and by processes of rarefaction and condensation. Centrifugal revolu- 
tion. Theories of vortices. The Pythagoreans ; philosophy uf meas- 
ure and harmony, commencement of a mathematical treatment of phys- 
ical phenomena. The order and government of the universe according 
to the physical works of Aristotle. The communication of motion con- 
sidered as the cause of all phenomena ; the tendency of the Aristotelean 
school but little directed to the opinion of the heterogeneity of matter. 
This species of natural philosophy bequeathed in fundamental ideas 
and form to the Middle Ages. Roger Bacon, the Mirror of Nature of 
Vincentz of Beauvais, Lt^er Cosmographicus of Albertus Magnus, Imago 
Mundi of the Cardinal Pierre d'Ailly. Progress through Giordano Bru 
no and Telesio. Clearness in the conceptions oi gravitation ^s mass at 
traction, by Copernicus. First attempt at a mathematical application 
of the doctrine of gravitation, by Kepler. The work on the Cosmos by- 
Descartes ( Traits du Monde) nobly undertaken, did not appear until 
long after his death, and only in fragments ; the Cosmotheoros of Huy- 
gens, unworthy of the great name. Newton, and his work Philosophite 
Naturalis Principia Mathematica. Endeavor toward a knowledge of 
the universe as a Whole. Is the problem solvable of tracing back to 
one principle all physical knowledge, from the law of gravitation to tho 



IV GENERAL SUMMARY 

formative activities in the organic and animated bodies ? VVhic has 
been discovered does not by a long way exhaust the discoverable. 
The iraperfectibility of empiric investigation makes the problem of ex- 
plaining the changeability of matter from the forces of matter an indef' 
inite one. 

A. Uranological Portion of the Physical Description of the Uni 
verse— p. 26-28. 
Two sections, one of which comprises the heaven of fixed 
stars; the other, our solar system — p. 26. 

a. AsTROSNOsY ; Heaven of the fixed stars. 

I. Tho realms of space, and conjectures regarding that which 
appears to occupy the space intervening between the heaven- 
ly bodies — p. 29-41. 

II. Natural and telescopic vision — p. 49-72 ; Scintillation of the 
stars— 73-83 ; Velocity of light— p. 84-88 ; Results of photom 
etry — p. 89-102. Order of the fixed stars according to their 
luminous intensity. 

III. Number, distribution, and color of the fixed stars — p. 103- 
139 ; Stellar clusters {stellar swarms) — p. 140-143 ; The Milky 
pyay interspersed with a few nebulous spots — p. 144-151. 

IV. New stars, and stars that have vanished — p. 151-160; Va- 
riable stars, whose recurring periods have been determined — 
p. 160-177; Variations in the intensity ot the light of stars 
whose periodicity is as yet uninvestigated — p. 177-182. 

V. Proper motion of the fixed stars — p. 182-185; Problematical 
existence of dark cosmical bodies — p. 185-187; Parallax — 
measured distances of some of the fixed stars — p. 187-194; 
Doubts as to the assumption of a central body for the whole 
sidereal heavens — p. 195-199. 

VI. Multiple, or double stars — Their number and reciprocal dis 
tances. Period of revolution of two stars round a common 
center of gravity — p. 199-213. 

VII. Nebulous spots. Are these only remote and very denso 
clusters of stars? The two Magellanic Clouds, in which 
crowded nebulous spots are interspersed with numerous stel- 
lar swarms. The so-called black spots (Coal-sacks) of tha 
Southern hemisphere — p. 13-53 

B. Solar Region — p. 53-134. 

I. The Sun considered as the central body — p. 59-88. 

II. The Planets— p. 88-134. 

A. General consideration of the planetary world — p. 88-134. 

a. Principal Planets— p. 89-131. 

b. Secondary Planets— p. 131-134. 

B. Special enumeration of the planets and their moons as parta 
of the solar system — p. 134. 

Sun— p. 135-137. 



OF CONTENTS. V 

Mercury— p. 137, 138. 
Venus— p. 138-141. 
Earth— p. 141. 

Moon of the Earth— p. 141-159. 
Mars— p. 159, 160. 
The small plane ts^p. 161 ; Flora, Victoria Vesta, Iris, 

Metis, Hebe, Parthenope, Astraea, Egeria, Irene, Euno 

mia, Juno, Ceres, Pallas, Hygeia ; 
Jupiter— p. 165-168. 

Satellites of Jupiter— p. 169, 170. 
Saturn— p. 170-174. 

Satellites of Saturn— p. 174, 175. 
Uranus— p. 175, 176. 

Satellites of Uranus— p. 176, 177. 
Neptune— p. 177-180. 

Satellites of Neptune— p. 180, 181. 

III. The comets— p. 181-201. 

IV. Ring of the zodiacal light— p. 201-204. 

V. Shooting stars, fire-balls, meteoric stones — p. 204-226 
Conclusion— p. 227-230. 

Corrections and additions to vol. iii., p. xi., xii. 
Index, p. 231-234. 

Special analysis of the individual sections of the astronomical part of 
the Cosmos. 

a. AsTROGNOsy. 

I. Cosmical space: Only isolated portions are measurable — p. 30. 
Resisting medium, celestial atmosphere, cosmical ether — p. 31, note I, 
and p. 33, note *. Radiation of heat by the stars — p. 35, note %. Tern 
perature of space — p. 37-39. Limited transparency? — p. 48. Regu- 
larly decreased period of revolution of the Comet of Encke — p. 39. 
Limitation of the atmosphere ? — p. 40. 

II. Natural and telescopic vision : Very different sources of light pre- 
sent similar relations of refraction — p. 44. Different velocities of the 
light of ignited solid bodies and that of frictional electricity — p. 45. 
Position of the Wollastonian lines — p. 45. Influence of tubes — p. 43. 
Optical means of distinguishing between direct and reflected light, and 
the importance of the means to physical astronomy — p. 45. Limits of 
ordinary vision — p. 48. Imperfection of the organ of vision ; false di- 
ameter of the stars — p. 52. Influence of the form of an object upon the 
minimum visual angle in experiments as to visibility ; necessity of a dif- 
ference of luminous intensity of -^^ ; visibility of distant objects, posi- 
tively and negatively — p. 48-56. On the visibility of stars by day wiih 
the naked eye from wells or upon lofty mountains — p. 56. A feeble 
light by the side of a stronger — p. 49, note *. Extending ray and star 
tails — p. 52. On the visibility of the satellites of Jupiter by the naked 
eye — p. 50. Undulation of the stars — p. 59. Commencement of tel- 
escopic vision ; application to measurement — p. 60-62. Refractors of 
great length — p. 63. Reflectors — p. 63. Day observations ; how strong 
magnifying powers facilitate the findin^j of the stars by day — p. 66 



VI GENERAL SUMMARY 

Explanation of the sparkling and scintillation of the stars— p. 73. Ve- 
locity of light — p. 79-88. Order of magnitude of the stars ; photomet- 
ric relations and methods of measurement — p. 89-98. Cyanoraeter— 
p. 97. Photometric order of the fixed stai's — p. 99-102. 

III. Niimber, distribution, and color of the fixed stars; Stellar clusters 
*nd the Milky Way : States of the sky which hinder or favor the de- 
tection of stars — p. 103. Number of the stars ; how many may be seen 
with the naked eye — p. 104. How many have been inserted in stellar 
charts with determinations of position — p. 108. Conjectural estimation 
of the number of stars which can be visible in the entire heavens with 
our present powers of penetrating space — p. 105. Contemplative as- 
trognosy of uncivilized people — p. 109. The Grecian sphere — p. 118. 
The crystal sky — p. 123. False diameter of the fixed stars in telescopes 
—p. 129. Smallest objects in the heavens which have yet been seea 
— p. 130. Difierence of colors in the stars, and the changes which have 
taken place in the colors since antiquity — p. 130. Sirius {Sothis) — p. 
132. The four royal stars — p. 136. Gradual acquaintance with the 
Southern heaven — p. 137. Distribution of the fixed stars, laws of rela- 
tive accumulation, gauging — p. 138. Clusters and swarms of stars — p 
140. The Milky Way— p. 143. 

IV. Stars that have newly appeared and disappeared ; variable stars 
and changes in the intensity of their light whose periodicity has not been 
investigated: New stars in the last 2000 years — p. 151. Periodically 
changeable stars: Historical particulars — p. 151. Color — p. 165. Num- 
ber — p. 164. Order recognizable in apparent irregularity ; great dif- 
ferences of brightness ; periods within periods — p. 167. Argelander's 
table of the variable stars with commentary — p. 172. Variable stars 
in undetermined periods {rj Arg0s, Capella, stars of the Ursae Major and 
Minor) — p. 181. Reference to the possible changes of temperature on 
the Earth's surface — p. 181. 

V. Proper motion of the fixed stars, dark cosmieal bodies, parallax ; 
doubts as to the assumption of a central body for the entire heaven of fixed 
$tars: Change of the physiognomy of the sky — p. 182. Amount of the 
proper motion — p. 184. Evidence in favor of the probable existence 
of non-luminous bodies — p. 186. Parallax and measurement of the dis- 
tance of some fixed stars from our solar system — p. 187. The aberra- 
tion of light may be applied to the determination of the parallax of 
double stars — p. 194. The discovery of the proper motion of the fixed 
stars has led to the knowledge of the motion of our own solar system, 
and even to the knowledge of the direction of this motion — p. 184 and 
194. Problem of the situation of the center of gravity of the whole 
heaven of fixed stars and central suns? — p. 196, and note t, P- 198, and 
p. 199, note *. 

VI. Double stars, period of revolution of two suns round a common 
center of gravity : Optical and physical double stars — p. 200; number 
— p. 201. Uniformity and difference of color ; the latter not the conse- 
quence of optical deception, of the contrast of complementary colors— 
p. 207, note *, p. 206, and p. 209, note *. Change of brightness— p. 209. 
Multiple combinations (three to six fold) — p. 209. Calculated orbitual 
elemeuts, half major axis and period of rotation in years — p. 213. 

VII. NchulcCf Magellanic Clouds, and Coal-sacks : Resolvability of tho 
nebulte; questions as to whether they are all remote and crowded 



OP CONTENTS. Vll 

clusters of stars ? — p. 13 (note $, p. 22, and p. 23, note *). Historical 
particulars — p. 14 (note *, p. 28). Number of nebulae whose positions 
are determined — p. 26 (notes * and +). Distribution of nebuUe and 
clusters of stars in the northern and southern hemispheres — p. 27 ; 
spaces poor in uebul®, and the maxima of accumulation — p. 28, and 
note *. Configuration of nebulae : spherical, annular, spiral, and plan- 
etary nebulae — p. 31. Nebula (cluster of stars) in Andromeda — p. 16- 
31 (note t, p. 31); nebula in Orion's sword — p. 17-39 (notes *, p. 18, 
t, p. 23, $, p. 36, *, p. 38, $, p. 39, and *, p. 40) ; large nebula round rj 
ArgOs — p. 40 ; nebula in Sagittarius — p. 41 ; nebula in Cygnus and Vul- 
pes ; spiral nebula in the northern Canes Venatici — p. 41. The two Ma- 
gellanic Clouds — p. 43 (note *, p. 48). Black spots or Coal-sacks — p. 51. 

/3. The Solar region; planets and their moons, ring of the zodiacal 
light, and swarms of meteor-asteroids — p. 53-88. 

I. The Sun considered as a central body : Numerical data — p. 59 (note 
*, p. 59", and p. 62, note *). Physical constitution of the surface; en- 
velopes of the dark solar globe ; Sun-spots, faculjE — p. 61. Diminutions 
in the daylight recorded by the annalists ; problematic obscurations— 
p. 73, and note. Intensity of the light in the center and at the edge 
of the Sun's disk — p. 79, and note; also p. 81, note *. Correlation of 
light, heat, electricity, and magnetism; Seebeck, Ampere, Faraday— 
p. 84. Influence of the Sun's spots upon the temperature of our at- 
mosphere — p. 80. 

II. The Planets : 

A. General comparative considerations : 

a. Principal Planets : 

1. Number and epoch of discovery — p. 89. Names, planetary 
days (week), and planetary hours — p. 92, and note t; also 
p. 94, note *. 

2. Classification of the planets in two groups — ^p. 102. 

3. Absolute and apparent magnitudes; configuration — p. 105. 

4. Order of the planets and their distances from the Sun ; the 
so-called law of Titius ; old belief that the cosmical bodies 
which we now see were not all visible from the beginning ; 
Proselenes — p. 106, note *, p. 108, and p. 120, note *. 

5. Masses of the planets — p. 118. 

6. Densities of the planets — p. 119. 

7. Periods of sidereal revolution and axial rotation — p. 120. 

8. Inclination of the planetary orbits and axes of rotation ; 
their influence upon climate — p. 121, and note %, p. 126. 

b. Secondary planets — p. 127 

B. Special consideration; enumeration of the individual planets and 
their relation to the Sun as central body. 

The Sun— p. 135-137. 

Mercury— p. 137, 138. 

Venus; spots — p. 138-141. 

The Earth; numerical relations — p. 141. 



VIU GENEIAL SUMMARY 

The Moon of the Earth ; produces light and heat ; ash-gray 
or earth-light in the Moon ; spots ; nature of the Moon's 
surface, mountains and plains, measured elevations ; pre 
vailing type of circular configuration ; craters of elevation 
without continuing eruptive phenomena;. old traces of 
the reaction of the interior upon the exterior (the sur- 
face) ; absence of Sun and Earth tides, as well of current! 
as transportive forces, on account of the want of a liquid 
element ; probable geognostic consequences of these re- 
lations— p. 141-159. 

Mars; ellipticity; appearances of surface altered by change 

of the seasons — p. 159, 160. 
The small planets— ^. 161, 162. 
Jupit.er : periods of rotation ; spots and belts — p. 165-168. 

Satellites of Jupiter — p. 169, 170. 
Saturn : bands, rings, eccentric position — p. 170-174. 

Satellites of Saturn — p. 174, 175. 
Uranus— p. 175, 176. 

Satellites of Uranus — p. 176, 177. 
Neptune: discovery and elements — p. 177-181. 

Satellites of Neptune— p. 181-201. 

III. The Comets : with the smallest masses occupying immense 
spaces ; configuration ; periods of revolution ; separation ; elements of 
the interior comets — p. 181-201. 

IV. The ring of the zodiacal light : Historical particulars. Intermit- 
tence two-fold ; hourly and annual ? Distinction to be made between 
the cosmical luminous process which belongs to the zodiacal light it- 
self and the variable transparency of our atmosphere. Importance of a 
long series of corresponding observations under the tropics at different 
elevations above the sea from 9 to 12,000 feet. Reflection like that at 
sunset. Comparison in the same night with certain parts of the Milky 
Way. Question as to whether the zodiacal light coincides with the 
plane of the Sun's equator — p. 201-204. 

V. Shooting stars, fire-halls, meteoric stones : Oldest positively determ 
med fall of aerolites, and the influence which the fall of ^Egos Potamos 
and its cosmical explanations exercised upon the theories of the uni- 
verse of Anaxagoras and Diogenes of Apollonia (of the later Ionic 
school) ; force of revolution which counteracts the pc wer of the fall 
(centrifugal force and gravitation) — p. 204-209, note \, p. 207, and p. 
209, note *. Geometric and physical relations of meteors in sporadic 
and periodic falls ; divergence of the shooting stars ; definite points of 
departure; mean number of sporadic and periodic shooting stars in an 
hour in different months — p. 209-214, note X, p. 210, and p. 211, note *. 
Besides the stream of St. Laurentius, and the now more feeble Novem- 
ber phenomenon, four or five other falls of shooting stars have been 
discovered which very probably occur periodically during the yeai' — 
p. 214, note *, p. 215, and p. 216, note *. Height and velocity of the 
meteors — p. 217. Physical relations, color and tails, process of com- 
bination, magnitudes ; instances of the firing of buildings — p. 217. Me- 
teoric stones ; falls of aerolites when the sky is clear, or after the for- 
mation of a small dark meteoric cloud — p. 220, note t, and p. 221, note * 



OF CONTENTS. IX 

Problematical abundance of the shooting stars between midnight and 
the early hours of morning (hourly variations) — p. 222. Chemical re- 
lations of the aerolites ; analogies with the constituents of telluric rock 
—p. 223-226. 

Conclusion : Retrospect -^f the undertaking. Limitation consistent 
with the nature of a phv^sicav «iescription of the universe. Representa- 
tion of the actual relations of cosmical bodies to each other. Kepler's 
laws of planetary motion. Simplicity of the uranological problem in 
opposition to the telluric, on account of the exclusion of material hete- 
rogeneity and change. Elements of the stability of the planetary gy». 
tern— p. 227-230. 

A2 



HUMBOLDT'S CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS 

TO VOL. III. 



Page 34, line 22. 

Since the printing of that part of the Cosmos where a doubt is ex- 
pressed as to whether it has been " shown with certainty that the posi- 
tions of the Sun influence the terrestrial- magnetism," the new and ex- 
cellent investigations of Faraday have proved the reality of such an in- 
fluence. Long series of magnetic observations in opposite hemispheres 
(c. g., Toronto in Canada, and Hobart Town in Van Diemen's Land), 
show that the terrestrial magnetism is subject to an annual variation 
which depends upon the relative position of the Sun and Earth. 

Page 59, line 2. 

The remarkable phenomenon of the undulation of stars has very re 
cently been observed at Trier by very trustworthy witnesses, in Sirius, 
between 7 and 8 o'clock, while near the horizon. See the letter of 
Herrn Flesch, in Jahn's Unterhaltungen fur Freunde der Astronomic . 

Page 132, line 21, note *. 

The wish which I strongly expressed that the historical epoch in 
which the disappearance of the red color of Sirius falls should be more 
positively determined, has been partially fulfilled by the laudable in- 
dustry of Dr. WSpcke, a young scholar, who combines an excellent ac- 
quaintance with Oriental languages with distinguished mathematical 
knowledge. The translator and commentator of the important Algebra 
of Omar Alkhayyami, writing to me from Paris in August, 1851, says, 
" I have examined the four manuscripts in this place of the Uranography 
of Abdurrahman Al-Sufi, in reference to your suggestion contained in the 
astronomical volume of the Cosmos, and found that a Bootis, a Tauri, 
a Scorpii, and a Orionis, are all expressly called red; Sirius, on the 
contrary, is not." Moreover, the passages refemng to it are uniformly 
as follows in all the four manuscripts : " The first among its (Great 
Dog) stars is the large, brilliant one in his mouth, which is represented 
on the Astrolabium, and is called Al-jemaanijah.^' Is it not probable 
from this investigation, and from what I quoted from Alfragani, that the 
epoch of the change of color falls between the time of Ptolemaeus and 
the Arabs. 

Page 194, line 21. 

In the condensed statement of the method by which the parallax of 
the double stars is found by means of the velocity of light, it should ba 



XII 



HUMBOLDT S CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS. 



eaid, The time which elapses between the moment in which the plane 
tary secondary star is nearest to the Earth, and that in which it is most 
distant from it, is always longer when the star passes from the point of 
grsatest proximity to that of greatest elongation, than in the convers^, 
when it returns from the point of greatest elongation to that of greatest 
proximity. 

Page 213, line 1. 

In the French translation of the astronomical volume of the Cosmos^ 
which to my gi-eat gratification, M. H. Faye has again undertaken, this 
learned astronomer has much enriched the section upon double stars 
I had myself neglected to make use of the important treatises of M. 
Yvon Villarceau, which were read at the Institute in the course of the 
year 1849. (See Connaissance des Temps pour Van 1832, p. 3-128.) 
I quote here from the table by M. Faye, of the orbital elements of eight 
double stars, the first four stars, which he considers to be the most cer- 
tainly determined : 



Elements of the 


Orbits of Double ' 


Stars. 


1 
Name and Magnitude. 


Semi- 
major 
axis. 


Eccen- 
tricity. 


Period of 
revolution 
in Years. 


Name of the Calcu- 
lator. 


^ Ursae Majoris, 
(4th and 5th Mag.) 


3"-857 
3"-278 
2"-295 
2"-439 


0-4164 
0-3777 
0-4037 
0-4315 


58-262 
60-720 
61-300 
61-576 


Savary 1830. 

J.Herschel..l849. 

Madler 1847. 

Y. Villarceau 1849. 


p Ophiuchi, 
(4th and 6th Mag.) 


4"-328 
4"-9C0 
4"-800 


0-4300 
0-4445 
0-4781 


73-862 
92-338 
92-000 


Encke...... 1832. 

Y. Villarceau 1849. 
Madler 1819. 


C Herculis, 
(3d and 6-5th Mag.) 


l"-208 
l"-254 


0-4320 
0-4482 


30-220 
36-357 


Madler 1847. 

Y. Villarceau 1847. 


71 Coronae, 
(5-5thand6thMag.) 


0"-902 
1"-012 
1"-111 


0-2891 
0-4744 
0-4695 


42-500 
42-501 
66-257 


Madler 1847. 

Y. Villarceau 1847. 
The same, 2d result. 



The problem of the period of revolution of tj Coronae admits of two 
solutions: of 42-5 and 66-3 years; but the late observations of Otto 
Struve give the preference to the second. M. Yvon Villarceau finds 
the semi-major axis, eccentricity, and periods of revolution in years 

yVirginis 3"-446 0-8699 153-787 

^ Cancri 0"-934 0-3662 58-590 

a Centauri 12"-128 07187 78-486 

The occultation oi one fixed s^ar by another, as was presented by f Her* 
culis, I have called apparent (p. 287). M. Faye shows that it is a con- 
sequence of the spui'ious diameter of the stars (^Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 66 
and 170) seen in our telescopes. The parallax c f 1830, Groombridge, 
which I gave (p. 27) as 0"-226, is found by Schlttter and Wichmann, 
0"-182, and by Otto Stmve, 0"-034. 



COSMOS 



VII. 

NEBULOUS SPOTS. ARE THESE ONLY REMOTE AND VEf.Y 

DENSE CLUSTERS OF STARS ? THE TWO MAGELLANIC 

CLOUDS, IN WHICH CROWDED NEBULOUS SPOTS ARE IN- 
TERSPERSED WITH NUMEROUS STELLAR SWARMS. THE SO- 
CALLED COAL-SACKS OF THE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE. 

Among the visible cosmical bodies occupying the regions 
of space, besides those which shine with stellar light (wheth- 
er self-luminous, or illumined like planets, stars isolated or 
in multiple groups, and revolving round a common center of 
gravity), there are also masses which present a faint and 
guilder nebidous light. ^ These bodies, which appear at one 
time as sharply defined, disk-formed, luminous clouds, at 
another as irregularly and variously-shaped masses, widely 
diffused over large spaces, seem to the naked eye, at first 
sight, to be wholly different from those cosmical bodies of 
which we treated fully in the last four sections of the Astrog- 
nosy. In the same way that there is an inclination to infer 
from the observed and as yet unexplained motion of the vis- 
ible cosmical bodies,! the existence of others hitherto invisi- 
ble, so the knowledge gained as to the resolvability of a con- 
siderable number of nebulous spots has recently led to con- 
clusions regarding the non-existence of all nebulae, and, in- 
deed, of all cosmical vapor generally. But whether these 
well-defined nebulous spots be a self-luminous vapory mat- 
ter, or remote, closely-throngc^.d globular clusters of stars, they 
must ever remain objects of vast importance in the knowl- 
edge of the structure of the universe and of the contents of 
space. 

The number whose positions have been determined by 
right ascension and declination exceeds 3600. Some of the 

* Cosmos, vol. i., p. 85-89, 91, and 142; vol. ii., p. 328; vol. iii., p 
37-41, 140, 154, and 162. r Cosmos, vol. iii.. p. 785, 186 



14, COSMOS, 

more irregularly diffused measure eight lunar diameters, Ac 
cording to William Herschel's earlier estimate, made in 1811, 
these nebulous spots cover at least 2 7 o^^ P^^^ of the whole 
visible firmament. As seen through colossal telescopes, the 
contemplation of these nebulous masses leads us into regions 
.from w^hence a ray of light, according to an assumption not 
A^holly improbable, requires millions of years to reach our 
»5arth, to distances for whose measurement the dimensions 
&lt;the distances of Sirius, or the calculated distances of the bi- 
nary stars in Cygnus and the Centaur) of our nearest stra- 
tum of fixed stars scarcely suffice. If these nebulous spots 
be elliptical or spherical sidereal groups, their very conglom- 
eration calls to mind the idea of a mysterious play of gravi- 
tative forces by which they are governed. If they be vapory 
massfta, having one or more nebulous nuclei, the various de- 
crees of their condensation suggest the possibility of a process 
of gradual star-formation from inglobate matter. No other 
cosroical structure — no other subject of this branch of astron- 
omy more contemplative than measuring — is, in like degree, 
adapted to excite the imagination, not merely as a symbolic 
ima^e of the infinitude of space, but because the investiga- 
tion of the different conditions of existing things, and of their 
presumed connection of sequences, promises to afford us an in- 
sight into the laws oi genetic development.^ 

The historical development of our knowledge of nebulous 
bodies teaches us that here, as in the progress of almost every 
other branch of physical science, the same opposite opinions, 
which still have numerous adherents, were maintained long 
since, although on weaker grounds. Since the general use 
of the telescope, we find that Galileo, Dominique Cassini, 
and the acute John Michell regarded all nebulse as remote 
clusters of stars ; while Halley, Derham, Lacaille, Kant, and 
Lambert maintained the existence of starless nebulous mass- 
es. Kepler (like Tycho Brahe before the invention of the 
telescope) was a zealous adherent of the theory of star-forma- 
tion from cosmical vapor — from condensed conglobate celes- 
tial nebulous matter. He believed " codi materiam tenuis- 
simam (the vapor which shines with a mild stellar light in 
the Milky Way) in unum glohum condensatam, stellam ef- 
jingere^ and grounded his opinion, not on the process of con- 
densation operating in defined roundish nebuloUs spots (for 
those were unknown to him), but on the sudden a,ppearance 
of new stars on the margin of the galaxy. 
♦ Cosmos, vol. i., p. 84. 



NEBULiE. 15 

If we take into account the number of objects discovered, 
the accuracy of their telescopic investigation, and the gener 
alization of views, the history of nebulous spots, like that of 
double stars, may be said to begin with WilUam Herschel. 
Until his time there were not more than 120 unresolved neb- 
ulae in both hemispheres whose positions were determined, 
including even the results of Messier' s meritorious labors ; 
and in 1786 the great astronomer of Slough published the 
first catalogue, containing 1000. I have already fully point 
ed out, in an earlier portion of this work, that the bodies 
named nebulous stars {yecpeXoEidelg) by Hipparchus and 
Geminus in the Catasterisms of the pseudo-Eratosthenes 
and in the Almagest of Ptolemy, are stellar clusters which 
appear to the naked eye with a nebulous luster. =^ This des- 
ignation, Latinized nebulosce, passed in the middle of the 
thirteenth century into the Alphonsine Tables, probably 
through the preponderating influence of the Jewish astrono- 
mer, Isaac Aben Sid Hassan, chief Rabbi of the wealthy 
synagogue at Toledo. The Alphonsine Tables were first 
printed in 1483 at Venice. 

The first notice of a remarkable aggregation of innumer- 
able true nebulous spots, blended with stellar swarms, dating 
from the middle of the tenth century, is in the writings of an 
Arabian astronomer, Abdurrahman Sufi, a native of the Per- 
sian Irak. The White Ox, which he saw shining with a 
milky light far below Canopus, was undoubtedly the larger 
Magellanic Cloud, which, witli an apparent breadth of nearly 
twelve lunar diameters, extends over a portion of the heav- 
ens measuring forty-two square degrees. No mention is made 
by European travelers of this phenomenon until the begin- 
ning of the sixteenth century, although, 200 years earlier, the 
Normans had advanced as far along the western coasts of Af- 
rica as Sierra Leone (8° 30' N. Lat.).t It might have been 
expected that a nebulous mass of such vast extent, which 

* Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 91, and note, and 140, and note. 

t Prior to the expedition of Alvaro Becerra. The Portuguese ad' 
vanced beyond the equator in 1471. — See Humboldt's Examen Critiqve 
de VHist. de la Giographie du Nouveau Continent, torn, i., p. 290-292 
In Eastern Africa the Lagides had availed themselves, for purposes of 
commerce, of the passage along the Indian Ocean, and, favored by the 
southwest monsoon (Hippalus), had passed from Ocelis in the Straits 
of Bab-el-Mandeb to the Malabar emporium of Muziris and to Ceylon 
(Cosmos, vol. ii., p. 172, and note). Although the Magellanic Clouds 
must have been seen in all these voyages, we meet with no record of 
their appearance. 



16 ^ COSMOS. 

was distinctly visible to the naked eye, would have attracted 
attention sooner.* 

The first isolated nebula which was observed and recog- 
nized by the telescope as wholly starless and as an object of 
special nature was the nebula near v Andromedae, which, like 
that last mentioned, is also visible to the naked eye. Simon 
Marius [Mayer], of Gunzenhausen, in Franconia, originally 
a musician, and subsequently court mathematician of one of 
the Margraves of Colmbach, the same person who saw the sat- 
ellites of Jupiter nine days earlier than Galileo, f has also the 
merit of having given the first, and, indeed, a very accurate 
description of a nebula. In the preface to his Mundus Jovi- 
alis,t he relates that, "on the 15th of December, 1612, hp 
observed a fixed object difiering in appearance from any he 
had ever seen. It was situated near the 3d and northern 
star of Andromeda's girdle ; seen with the naked eye, it ap- 
peared to him to be a mere cloud, and by the aid of the tel- 
escope he could not discover any signs of a stellar nature, a 

* Sir John Herscbel, Observations at the Cape, $ 132. 

t Op. cit., p. 357, 509 (note 43). Galileo, who endeavored to refer 
the difference in the days of discovery (29th of December, 1609, and 
7th of Januaiy, 1610) to a difference in the calendar, maintained that he 
had seen the satellites of Jupiter one day earlier than Marius, and even 
allowed himself to be so far carried away by his indignation at " the 
falsehood of the heretical impostor of Gutzenhausen" (bugia del im- 
postore eretico GjintzenhusaTio^') as to declare his belief" that very prob- 
ably the heretic, Simon Marius, never observed the Medicean planets" 
('' che molto probabilmente il eretico, Simon Mario, non ha ossei-vato gi- 
ammai i Pianeti Medicei"). — See Operedi Galileo Galilei, Padova, 1744, 
tom. ii., p. 235-237 ; and Nelli, Vita e Commercio letterario di Galilei, 
1793, vol. i., p. 240-246. The " heretic" had nevertheless expressed 
himself very pacifically and modestly in reference to the extent of merit 
due to his discovery. " I simply affirm," says Simon Marius, in the 
preface to the Mundus Jovialis, ''haec sidera (Brandenburgica) a nullo 
mortalium mihi ulla ratione commonstrata, sed propria indagine sub ip- 
sissimum fere tempus, vel aliquanto citius quo Galilffius in Italia ea pri- 
mum vidit, a me in Germania adinventa et observata fuisse. Merito 
7gitur Galilseo tribuitur et manet laus primae inventionis horum side- 
rum apud Italos. An autem inter meos Germanos quispiara ante me 
ea invenerit et viderit, hactenus intelligere non potui." " I simply af- 
firm that I was led to the discovery of these stars, not by any reason- 
ings of others, but by the result of my own investigations, and that they 
were observed by me in Germany about the very same time, or a lit- 
tle sooner, than Galileo first saw them in Italy. To Galileo, among the 
Italians, is therefore due the merit of having first discovered these stars. 
But whether, among my own countrymen in Germany, any person be« 
:.^re me has discovered and seen them, I have not as yet been able to 
ascertain." 

t Mundu$ Jovialis, anno 1609, delectus ope pertpicilli Belgici. (Nori 
^ers^x, 1614.) 



NEBULiE. 17 

circumstance which distinguished it from the nebulous stars 
in Cancer, and from other nebulous clusters. All that could 
oe recognized was a whitish glimmering appearance, bright- 
er in the center, and fainter toward the margins. With a di- 
ameter of one fourth of a degree, the whole resembled a light 
seen from a great distance through half-transparent horn 
plates {similis fere splendor apparet, si a longinquo cande- 
la ar dens per cornu pellucidum de noctu cernatur).''^ Si- 
mon Marius hazards a conjecture whether this singular star 
be not of recent formation, but will not give a decided opin- 
ion, although it strikes him as singular that Tycho Brahe, 
who had enumerated all the stars in the girdle of Andromeda, 
should have said nothing of this nehulosa. The Mundus Jo- 
malis, which first appeared in 1614, indicates, therefore, as I 
have already observed elsewhere, =^ the difference between a 
nebulous spot unresolvable by the telescopic powers of that 
age, and a cluster of stars,t to which the mutual proximity of 
its numerous small stars, not visible to the naked eye, imparts 
a nebulous luster. Notwithstanding the great improvements 
made in optical instruments, the nebula in Andromeda was 
considered for nearly two centuries and a half — as at its dis- 
covery — to be wholly devoid of stars, until two years since, the 
transatlantic observer, George Bond, of Cambridge, in Massa- 
chusetts, discovered 1500 small stars within the limits of the 
nebula. I have not hesitated to class it among the stellar 
clusters, although the nucleus has not hitherto been resolved. $ 
It is probably only to be ascribed to some singular acci- 
dent that Galileo, who, when the Sidereus Nuntius appear- 
ed in 1610, had already made frequent observations of the con- 
stellation of Orion, should have subsequently mentioned, in 
his Saggiatore, no other nebulsB in the firmament but those 
which his own weak optical instruments had resolved into 
stellar clusters, although he might long before have learned, 
through the Mundus Jovialis, of the discovery of the starless 
nebula in Andromeda. When he speaks of the nehulose del 
Orione e del Prescpe, he understands by the expression merely 
"aggregations (coacervazioni) oi innumerable small stars." § 
He successively delineates, under the deceptive designations of 
nebuloscB capitis, cingidi, et ensis Orionis, clusters of stars, 

• Cosmos, vol. ii., p. 320. 

t Germ,, Sternhaufen ; French, amas d'etoiles. 
X Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 142. 

$ Galilei nolo che le Nehulose di Orione nulV altro erano che rnucchi e 
coac«rvazioni cC innumerabili Sfelle.'^ — Nelli, Vita di Galilei, i., p. 208 



18 COSMOS. 

ill whicli he exults in having discovered 400 hitherto unob- 
served stars in a space of one or two degrees. He never 
makes any reference to unresolved nebulous matter. Yet 
how could the great nebulous spot in the sword of Orion have 
failed to rivet his attention ? But, although this great ob- 
server probably never saw the irregular nebula in Orion, or 
the roundish disk of a so-called irresolvable nebula, still his 
general views=^ on the intrinsic nature of nebulous spots were 
very similar to those to which the greater number of our 
astronomers of the present day incline. Like Galileo, Hevel 
of Dantzig, who, although a distinguished observer, was not 
much inclined to rely upon telescopic observation for aid in 
cataloguing the stars,! made no mention in his writings of 
the great nebula in Orion. His star catalogue, moreover, did 
not contain upward of 1 6 nebulous spots, of which the posi- 
tions were accurately determined. 

At length, in the year 1656, Huygens discovered the neb- 

* '' In primo integram Ononis constellationem pingere decreveram ; 
vero, ab ingenti stellarum copia, temporis vero'inopia obrutus, aggres- 
sionem hauc in aliam occasionem distuli. Cum non tantum in Galaxia 
Lacteus ille candor veluti albicantis nubis spectetur, sed complures con- 
similis coloris areolce sparsimper cethera subfulgeant, si in illarum, quam- 
libet specillura convertas, stellarum conslipatarum ccetum offendes. 
Amplius (quod magis mirabile) stellse, ab astronomis singulis in lianc 
usque diem nebulosce appellatae, stellarum mirum in modum consitarura 
gregessunt : ex quarum radiorum commixtione, dum uuaquaque ob ex- 
iiitatem, sen maximam a nobis remotionem, oculorum aciem fugit, cau. 
dor ille consurgit, qui densior pars cceli, stellarum aut solis radios re- 
torquere valens, hucusque creditus est." — Opere di Galileo Galilei, Pa- 
dova, 1744, torn, ii., p. 14, 15. " At first I had resolved to describe 
the whole constellation of Orion ; but the multitude of the stars and the 
want of leisure compelled me to postpone the undertaking till another 
occasion. Since not only in the Milky Way may be observed that brill- 
iancy as of a whitish cloud, but several areoles of a similar color are 
scattered through the firmament ; if you direct the glass to any one of 
them, you will meet with a host of clustered stars. Moreover, the stars 
(still stranger to say) which, by every astronomer, are to this day call- 
ed nebulous, are clusters of stars lying close together in a wonderful 
manner, from the combination of whose rays (while they can not be 
separately distinguished by the eye on account of their minuteness, or 
their very great distance from us) arises that whiteness, which, from its 
capacity of reflecting the rays of the stars or of the sun, has been hith- 
erto supposed to belong to a denser part of the atmosphere." — Side- 
reus Nuntius, p. 13, 15 (Nos. 19-21), and 35 (No. 56). 

t Compare Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 41. I also remember a vignette at the 
close of the introduction to Hevel's Firmamenttim Sobescianum, 1687, 
in which three genii are represented, two of whom are making ob 
Bervations with Hevel's sextants. The third genius is carrying a tele- 
scope which he appears to be worshiping, while those observing ex 
claim, PrcEstat nudo oculo ! 



NEBULiE. 19 

ula in the sword of Orion, which is so important fiom its 
extent and form, and has become so famous from the num- 
ber and celebrity of its subsequent investigators.* Huygens 
was the means of inducing Picard (in 1676) to devote himself 
diligently to the investigation of this nebulous body. Ed- 
mund Halley, during his sojourn in St. Helena in 1677, was 
the first to determine any of the nebulous spots belonging to 
portions of the southern heavens not visible in Europe, al- 
though his observations embraced only a very small number. 
The lively interest taken by the great Cassini (Jean Dom- 
inique) in all branches of contemplative astronomy, led him, 
toward the close of the seventeenth century, to a more care- 
ful exploration of the nebulae in Andromeda and Orion. He 
thought he could detect alterations in the latter since Huy 
gens's observations, and that he " had recognized stars in the 
former which could not be seen with telescopes of low pow- 
ers." There are reasons for regarding the assertion of an 
alteration of figure as a delusion ; not entirely so the exist- 
ence of stars in the nebula in Andromeda since the remark- 
able observations of George Bond. Cassini, moreover, con- 
jectured, on theoretical grounds, the possibility of such a res- 
olution of the nebula ; since, in direct opposition to Halley 
and Derham, he considered all nebulous spots to be very re- 
mote stellar swarms. f The faint mild effulgence in Androm- 
eda was indeed, according to his opinion, analogous to the 
zodiacal light, which he also conjectured to be composed of a 
crowd of densely, thronged, small planetary bodies. $ Lacaille's 
residence in the southern hemisphere (at the Cape of Good 
Hope, and in the Isle of France and Bourbon, between 1750- 
1752), so considerably increased the number of known nebu- 
lous spots, that Struve has justly remarked, that from the ob- 
servations of this traveler more was known, at that time, of 

* Huygens, Systema Saturnhim, in his Opera varia, Lugd. Bat., 1724, 
torn, ii., p. .52.3 and 593. 

t "Dans les deux n^buleuses d'Andromede et d'Orion, j'ai vu des 
^toiles qu'on n'aper^oit pas avec des lunettes communes. Nous ne sa- 
vons pas si Ton ne pourrait pas avoir des lunettes assez grandes pour 
que toute la nebulosite pAt se resoudre en de plus petites etoiles, comme 
il arrive k celle du Cancer et du Sagittaire." " I have seen st£ii-s in the 
nebula of Andromeda and Orion," says Dom'nique Cassini, " which can 
not be recognized by ordinary insti'uments. We are ignorant whethei 
telescopes may not be constructed of sufficient power to resolve the 
whole nebula into smaller stars, as has been done in .he case of th^ 
nobnlae in Cancer and Sagittarius." — Delambre, Hist, de VAttr. Mo 
Mrne, com. ii., p. 700 and 744. 

t Cosmos, vol. i,, p. 141, note. 



20 COSMC.S. 

the nebt.lous bodies of the southern hemisphere, than of those 
which were visible in Europe. Lacaille, moreover, success- 
fully attempted to divide nebulae into classes according to their 
apparent configuration ; he also was the first to undertake, 
though with little result, the difficult task of analyzing the 
heterogeneous contents of the Magellanic Clouds {nubecula 
major et rmnor). If we subtract the 14 nebulae, which, even 
with instruments of low powers, were perfectly resolved into 
true clusters of stars, from the other 42 isolated nebulous spots 
which Lacaille observed in the southern heavens, there re- 
main only 28, while Sir John Herschel, by the aid of more 
powerful instruments, as well as greater skill and superior 
powers of observation, succeeded in discovering under the 
same zone, and also independently of clusters, as many as 
1500 nebulous spots. 

Devoid of personal knowledge or experience of the subject, 
and originally ignorant of each other's attempts, although 
both had very similar aims in view,* Lambert (from 1749) 
and Kant (from 1755) speculated with admirable sagacity on 
nebulous spots, detached galaxies, and sporadic nebulous and 
stellar islands scattered singly through the realms of space. 
Both inclined to the nebular hypothesis, and to the idea of a 
perpetual development in the regions of space, and even of a 
star-formation from cosmical vapor. The great traveler, Le 
Gentil (1760—1769), long before his voyages, and his unsuc- 
cessful observations of the transit of Venus, had imparted ani- 
mation to the study of nebulae by his observations on the con- 
stellations of Andromeda, Sagittarius, and Orion. He made 
use of an object-glass 'of Campani's, 37 feet in focal length, 
which was in the possession of the Paris Observatory. In 
entire opposition to the views of Halley, Lacaille, Kant, and 
Lambert; the intellectual John Michell declared (as Galileo 
and Dominique Cassini had done) that all nebulae were stel- 
lar clusters, aggregations of very minute or very remote tel- 
escopic stars, whose existence would undoubtedly be some 
day revealed by means of more perfect optical instruments.! 

* On the commnuity and difTerenco of ideas between Kant and 
Lambert, as well as in reference to the period of their publications, 
Bee Struve, Etudes d^Astr. Stellaire, p. 11, 13, 21, notes 7, 15, and 33. 
Kant's Allgemeine Natur-Geschichte und Theorie des Himmels appear- 
ed anonymously, and was dedicated to Frederick the Great, 175.5. 
Lambert's Photometria, as already remarked, appeared in 1760; and 
his Sammlung kosmologischer Briefe uher die Einrichtung des Welt- 
baucM, in 17G1. 

t " Those nebulae," says John Michell in 17G7 (Pkilos Transact., vol 



NEBULiE. 21 

Compared with the slow progress we have hitherto depicted, 
the knowledge of nebulous spots received a rich accession of 
facts by the persevering industry of Messier. His catalogue 
of 1771 contains, after deducting the older nebulae discovered 
by Lacaille and Mechain, 66 w'hich had not been previously 
observed. He had the merit of doubling the number of the 
nebulous spots hitherto enumerated in both hemispheres, al- 
though his labors were carried on in the ill-supplied Observa- 
toire de la Marine (Hotel de Clugny).=* 

To these feeble beginnings succeeded the brilliant epochs 
of the discoveries of William Herschel and his son. The for- 
mer began, as early as 1779, a regular exploration of the nu- 
merous nebulous masses with which the heavens are studded. 
These observations were made with a seven-feet reflector. 
His colossal forty-feet telescope was completed in 1787; and 
in the three catalogues! which he published in 1786, 1789, 
and 1802, he indicated the positions of 2500 nebulae and 
cluste-^ of stars. Until 1785, or almost as late as 1791, 
this great observer appears to have been more disposed, like 
Michell, Cassini, and the present Lord Rosse, to regard the 
nebulous spots which he was unable to resolve as very remote 
clusters of stars ; but a prolonged consideration of the subject 
between 1799 and 1802 led him to adopt the nebular theory, 
as Halley and Lacaille had done, and even, with Tycho Brahe 
and Kepler, the theory of a star-formation through the grad- 
ual condensation of cosmical vapor. The two hypotheses, 
however, are not necessarily connected. $ The nebulous and 
stellar clusters observed by Sir WiUiam Herschel were sub- 
jected by his son to a renewed investigation from 1825 to 
1833 ; he also enriched the older catalogues with 500 new 
objects, and published in the Philosophical Tra7isactions for 
1833 (p. 365-481) a complete catalogue of 2307 nebulae and 
clusters of stars. This great work contains all that had been 
discovered in the heavens of Central Europe ; and in the five 
succeeding years (from 1834-1838) we find Sir John Her- 

Ivii., for 1767, p. 251), " in which we can discover either none, or only 
a few stars, even with the assistance of the best telescopes, are probably 
systems that are still more distant than the rest." 

* Messier, in the Mim. de VAcadimie des Sciences, 1771, p. 435, and 
in the Connaissance des Temps pour 1783 et 1784. The whole catalogue 
contains 103 objects. 

t Philos. Transact., vols. lxxvi.,lxxix., and xcii. 

X " The nebular hypothesis, as it has been termed, and the theory of 
sidereal aggregation, stand, in fact, quite independent of each other. "- 
Sir John Herschel, Oitiiwes of Astronomy, $ 872, p. 599. 



22 COSMOS. 

« 

schel engaged at the Cape of Good Hope in exploring the 
whole of the visible firmament with a colossal twenty-feet 
reflector, and adding 1708 determinations of position to his 
previous catalogue of 2307 nebulae and clusters of stars !* 
Only one third of the southern nebulae and clusters of stars 
in Dunlop's catalogue (containing 629 nebulous bodies, ob- 
served from 1825-1827, at Paramatta, with a nine-feet re- 
flector, having a nine-inch speculumf) were inserted in Sir 
John Herschel's work. 

A third great epoch in our knowledge of these mysterious 
cosmical bodies commenced with the construction of the mar- 
velous fifty-three feet telescope^ of the Earl of Rosse, at Par- 
sonstown. All that had ever been advanced on either side 
of the question, during the long fluctuation of opinions in the 
different stages of the development of cosmical contem.plation, 
was now made the -subject of keen discussion in the contest 
regardmg the nebular hypothesis and its asserted untenabil- 
ity. It appears, from all the notices I have been able to col- 
lect from the works of distinguished astronomers long accus- 
tomed to the observation of nebulous spots, that out of a large 
number of nebulae indiscriminately taken from among all the 
classes contained in the catalogue of 1833, and regarded as 
irresolvable, almost all (Dr. Robinson, the Director of the Ar- 
magh Observatory, enumerates more than 40 such) have been 
perfectly resolved. § Sir John Herschel maintains the same 

* The numbers which I here give include the objects enumerated 
from Nos. 1 to 2307 in the European, Northern Catalogue of 1833, and 
those from Nos. 2308 to 4015 in the African, Southern Catalogue. — Ob- 
servations at the Cape, p. 51-128. 

t James Duulop, in the Philos. Transact, for 1828, p. 113-151. 

t Compare Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 65, and note. 

$ See ^« Account of the Earl of Rosse's great Telescope, -p. 14-17, 
which gives a list of the nebulae resolved by Dr. Robinson and Sir James 
South in March, 1845. " Dr. Robinson could not leave this part of his 
subject without calling attention to the fact that no real nebula seemed 
to exist among so many of these objects chosen without any bias : all 
appeared to be clusters of stars, and every additional one which shall be 
resolved will be an additional argument against the "existence of any 
such." — Schumacher, Astr. Nachr., No. 536. In the Notice sur les 
grands Telescopes de Lord Oxmantown, aujourd^hui Earl of Rosse {Bib- 
Itothdque Universelle de Geneve, tom. Ivii., 1845, p. 342-357), we find the 
following passage: " Sir James South rappelle que jamais il n'a vu de 
representations sidexdales aussi magnifiques que celles que lui offrait 
I'instrument de Parsonstown; qu'une bonne partie des nebuleuses se 
presentaient comme des amas ou groupes d'etoiles, tandis que quelques 
autres, k ses yeux du moins, n'ofFraient aucune apparence de resolution 
en ^toiles." "Sir James South remarks that he never beheld more mag- 
nificent representations of the stars than tliose he saw in the Parsoni*. 



NEBULA. 23 

«riew, as well in his opening address before the British Asso- 
ciation at Cambridge in 1845, as in the Outlines ofAstroU' 
omyy 1849, where he expresses himself as follows : " The 
magnificent reflecting telescope constructed by Lord E-osse, 
six feet in aperture, has resolved or rendered resolvable mul- 
titudes of nebulas which had resisted all inferior powers. . . . 
Although, therefore, nebulae do exist which, even in this pow- 
erful telescope, appear as nebulae, without any sign of resolu- 
tion, it may very reasonably be doubted whether there be 
really any essential physical distinction between nebulae and 
clusters of stars*."* 

The constructor of the powerful optical apparatus at Par- 
sonstown, who always discriminates between the result of act- 
ual observation and the promises of a knowledge to which 
we hope to attain, expresses himself with much caution re- 
garding the nebula in Orion, in a letter to Professor Nichol, 
of Glasgow,! dated Parsonstown, 19th of March, 1846 : "In 
accordance with my promise of communicating to you the 
result qf our examination of Orion, I think I may safely say, 
that there can be little, if any, doubt of the resolvability of 
the nebula. Since you left us, there was not a single night 
when, in absence of the moon, the air was fine enough to ad- 
mit of our using more than half the magnifying power the 
speculum bears ; still we could plainly see that all about the 

town telescope, and that a great number of nebulae appeared like clus- 
ters or groups of stars, while others, at least to his sight, presented no 
appearance of resolution." 

* See Outlines, p. 597, 598; also the Report of the Fifteenth Meeting 
of the British Association held at Cambridge in June, 1845, p. xxxvi. : 
" By far the major part," says Sir John Herschel, *' probably, at least, 
nine tenths of the nebulous contents of the heavens, consist of nebulae 
of spherical or elliptical forms, presenting every variety of elongation 
and central condensation. Of these a great number have been resolved 
into distant stars (by the reflector of the Earl of Rosse), and a vast mul- 
titude more have been found to present that mottled appearance which 
renders it almost a matter of certainty that an increase of optical pow- 
er would show them to be similarly composed. A not unnatural or un- 
fair induction would therefore seem to be, that those which resist such 
resolution do so only in consequence of the smallness and closeness of 
the stars of which they consist; that, in short, they are only optically, 
and not physically nebulous. Although nebula? do exist which, even 
in this powerful telescope (of Lord Rosse), appear as nebula?, without 
any sign of resolution, it may very reasonably be doubted whether there 
be really any essentiil physical distinction between nebula) and clus- 
ters of 8tar§." 

t Dr. Nichol, Professor of Astronomy at Glasgow, published the let- 
ter above referred to in his Thoughts of some Important Points relating 
to the Syttem of the World, 1846, p. 55. 



24 COSMOS. 

trapezium is a mass of stars, the rest of the nebulae als' 
abounding with stars, and exhibiting the characteristics of re- 
solvabiHty strongly marked." At a subsequent period (1848) 
Lord Rosse had not announced that his expectations had as 
yet been fulfilled, although he cherished the hope of being 
able to resolve the remaining portion of the nebula into stars. 

When we separate the results of actual observation from 
those of mere inductive conclusions in this much-disputed 
question of the existence or non-existence of a self-luminous, 
vaporous matter in the universe, we find that although the 
increasing improvements in telescopic vision may indeed con- 
siderably diminish the number of nebulsB, they caniiot by any 
means wholly exhaust them. By the application of increas- 
ing powers, each new instrument may resolve what the pre- 
ceding ones had left unresolved, but it must, at the same time, 
in consequence of its greater powers of penetrating space, re- 
place (at least partially) the resolved nebulse by others not 
previously reached. =^ A resolution of the older, and the dis 
covery of new nebulse, would therefore follow one another in 
endless succession, as the fruit of increased optical power. 
For if we suppose a different result, we must either, accord- 
ing to my view, assume the occupied regions of space to be 
limited, or that the world-islands, to one of which our system 
belongs, are so remote from each other that no telescopic in- 
strument can ever be invented of sufficient power to penetrate 
to the confines of any other of these worlds, and that our last 
or extremest nebulae may resolve themselves into clusters of 
stars, which, like the stars in the Milky Way, " are projected 
on a black ground entirely free from vapor."t But can we 
believe in the probability of a condition of the universe, and 
of a degree of perfection in optical instruments, in which the 
entire firmament will no longer exhibit any unresolved neb- 
ulous spots ? 

The hypothetical assumption of a self-luminous fluid, ap- 
pearing, when sharply defined, in round or oval nebulous spots, 
must not be confounded with the equally hypothetical as- 
sumption of a non-luminous ether pervading the universe, and 
generating by its unduJatory motion the phenomena of light, 
radiant heat, and electro-magnetism.$ The emanations from 
cometary nuclei, which, in the form of tails, frequently extend 
over enormous tracts of space, disperse the substance of which 
they are composed — and with which we are unacquainted — 

* Compare Edinburgh Review, vol. Ixxivii., 1848, p. 1 86. 

t Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 144, and note. X Ibid., p. 34. 



NEBULiE. 25 

tmong the planetary orbits of our solar system, which they 
intersect. But when separated from the controlling nucleus, 
this substance ceases to be perceptibly luminous. Newton 
even considered it possible that vapor es ex sole et stellisjixis 
et caudis cometarum, " vapors from the sun, the stars, and 
the tails of comets," might blend with our terrestrial atmos- 
phere.* No telescope has as yet indicated any sidereal char- 
acter in the vaporous, rotating, and flattened ring of the zodi- 
acal light. Whether the particles of which this ring consists, 
and which, according to some, are conceived to rotate upon 
themselves in obedience to dynamic conditions, and, accord- 
ing to others, merely to revolve round the Sun, are illumined 
or self-luminous, like many kinds of terrestrial vapors,! is a 
question as yet undecided. Dominique Cassini believed them 
to be small planetary bodies. $ It seems as if it were a re- 
quirement of the human intellect to seek in all fluid bodies 
for discrete molecular particles,^ similar to the full or hollow 
vesicles of which clouds are formed ; while the gradations in 
the decrease of density in our planetary system, from Mercury 
to Saturn and Neptune (from 1-12 to 0*14; the Earth being 
= 1), leads the mind to the consideration of comets, through 
the external layers of whose nuclei even a faint star contin- 
ues visible, and finally to that of discrete particles, so deficient 
in density that their solidity, either within large or small di- 
mensions, can scarcely be characterized, except by the limits 
which bound them. It was by such considerations as to the 
constitution of the apparently vaporous zodiacal light that 
Cassini, long before the discovery of the so-called smaller plan- 
ets between Mars and Jupiter, and prior to all conjectures re- 
garding meteor-asteroids, was led to the idea that there exist 
cosmical bodies *of all dimensions and all degrees of density. 
We here almost involuntarily touch v^^on the old metaphys« 
ical controversy regarding matter of primitive fluidity and 
that composed of discrete molecular particles, and therefore 
more amenable to mathematical treatment. From hence we 
turn the more readily to our former consideration of the pure- 
ly objective part of the phenomenon. 

In the 3926 (2451 + 1475) positions which belong, a. to 
the portion of the firmament visible at Slough, and which we 
shall here, for the sake of brevity, term the northern heav- 
ens, according to the three catalogues of Sir William Herschel 

* Newton, PJiilos. Nat. Principia Mathematica, 1760, torn, iii., p. 671 
\ Cosmos, vol. i., p. 141. % Ibid., p. 140 

$ Observations at the Cape, $ 109-111. 

VoT.. IV.— B 



26 COSMOS. 

from 1786 to 1802, and the above-named great exploration 
of the heavens published by his son in the Philos. Transact 
of 1833 ; and b. to the portion of the southern heavens visi- 
ble at the Cape of Good Hope, according to Sir John Her- 
schel's African Catalogues, nebulae and clusters of stars are 
set down indiscriminately together, I have, however, deemed 
it best, notwithstanding the natural affinity of these objects, 
to enumerate them separately, in order to indicate a definite 
epoch in the history of their discovery. I find that the Nwth- 
em Catalogue^ contains 2299 nebulae and 152 clusters of 
stars; the Southern or Cape Catalogue, 1239 nebulae and 
236 clusters of stars. We have, therefore, 3538 for. the num- 
ber of the nebulae throughout the firmament which were given 
in these catalogues as not yet resolved into clusters. This 
number may, perhaps, be increased to 4000, if we take into 
account 300 or 400 seen by Sir "William Herschel,! but not 
again determined, and the 629 observed by Dunlop at Para- 

* The data on which these numbers ai-e based require some expla- 
nation. The three catalogues of the elder Herscliel contain 2500 objects, 
viz., 2303 nebulae and 197 clusters of stars. (Madler, ^s^?-., p. 448.) 
These numbers were altered in the subsequent and far more exact ex- 
ploration made by Sir John Herschel (Observations of Nebulae and Clus- 
ters of Stars made at Slough with a twenty-feet reflector, between the 
years 1825 and 1833, in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society of London for the year 1833, p. 365-481). About 1800 objects 
w^ere identical with those of the three earlier catalogues ; but 300 or 400 
were temporarily excluded, and more than 500 newly discovered were 
determined according to Right Ascension and Declination. (Struve, 
Astr. Stellaire, p. 48.) The Northern Catalogue contains 152 clusters 
of stars, consequently 2307 — 152:=2155 nebula); but, in reference to 
the Southern Catalogue {Observations at the Cape, p. 3, § 6, 7), we have 
to subtract from the 4015 — 2307=1708 objects, among which there are 
236 clusters of stars (see Op. cit., p. 3, § 6, 7, p. 128), 233, viz., 89-{- 
135-f-9, as belonging to the Northern Catalogue, and observed by Sir 
William and Sir John Herschel at Slough, and by Messier in Paris. 
There remain, therefore, for the Cape observations, 1708 — 233=1475 
nebulae and clusters of stars, or 1239 nebulae alone. We have, how- 
ever, to add 135-f 9=144 to the 2307 objects of the Northern Slougu 
Catalogue, which increase its numbers to 2451 objects, in which, after 
subtracting 152 clusters, there remain 2299 nebulae, a number which 
is not, however, very strictly limited to the latitude of Slough. When 
numerical relations are to be given in the topography of the firmament 
of both hemispheres, the author feels that although such data are from 
their nature variable, owing to the differences in the epochs and the 
advances of observation, he is bound to have regard to their accuracy. 
In a sketch of the Cosmos, it must be endeavored to delineate the con- 
dition of science appertaining to a definite epoch. 

t Sir John Herschel says, in his Observations at the Cape, p. 134, 
* There are between 300 and 400 nebulae of Sir William Herschel's Cat 
alugue still unobserved by me : for the most part, very faint objects " 



NEBULiE. 27 

matta, with a nine-inch Newtonian reflector, of which Sir 
John Herschel included only 206 in his catalogue.* Simi- 
lar results have recently heen published by Bond and Mad- 
ler. The number of nebulae, compared with that of double 
stars, appears, therefore, according to the present condition 
of science, to be in the ratio of 2 : 3 ; although it must not 
be forgotten that under the designation of double stars are 
included those which are merely optically double, and that 
hitherto alterations of position have only been observed in a 
ninth, or perhaps but an eighth portion of the whole number. 1 

The above numbers — 2299 nebulae, with 152 clusters of 
stars, in the Northern, and only 1239 nebulae, with 236 clus- 
ters of stars, in the Southern Catalogue — show that the south- 
ern hemisphere, with a smaller number of nebulae, possesses 
a preponderance of clusters of stars. If we assume that all 
nebulae are, from their probable constitution, resolvable, as 
merely more remote clusters of stars or stellar groups, com- 
posed of smaller and less thronged, self-luminous celestial bod- 
ies, this apparent contrast (whose importance has been the 
more noticed by Sir John Herschel$ in consequence of his 
having employed reflectors of equal powers in both hemi- 
spheres) indicates, at least, a striking difference in the nature 
and cosmical position of nebulae, that is to say, in reference 
to the directions in which they present themselves to the ob- 
servation of the inhabitants of the earth in the northern or 
southern firmament. 

We owe to the same great observer our first accurate knowl- 
edge of, and cosmical survey of, the distribution of nebulae and 
groups of stars throughout the entire heavens. With a view 
of investigating their position, relative local accumulation, 
and the probability or improbability of their being arranged 
in accordance with certain characteristic features, he classi- 
fied between three and four thousand objects graphically, in 
divisions, each embracing a space measuring 3° Declination 
and 15m. Right Ascension. The greatest accumulation of 
nebulous spots occurs in the northern hemisphere, where they 
are distributed through Leo Major and Leo Minor ; the body, 
tail, and hind feet of the Great Bear ; the nose of Camelo- 
pardalus ; the tail of the Dragon ; Canes Yenatici ; Coma 
Beisnices (where the north pole of the galaxy is situated); ^ 

* Op. cit., $ 7. Compare Dunlop's Cat. of Nebulae and Clusters of 

the Southern Hemisphere, in the Philos. Transact, for 1828, p. 114-146 

t Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 200. X Observations at the Cape, $ 105-107. 

% III the Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 144. lines 5 and 6 from the top, by an 



28 COSMOS. 

the right foot of Bootes ; and more especially through the 
head, wings, and shoulder of Virgo. This zone, which has 
been termed the nebulous region of Virgo, contains, as al- 
ready stated,^ one third of all the nebulous bodies in a space 
embracing the eighth part of the surface of the celestial hem- 
isphere. It does not stretch far beyond the ecliptic, extend- 
ing only from the southern wing of Virgo to the extremity 
of Hydra and to the head of the Centaur, without reaching 
its feet or the Southern Cross. A less dense accumulation 
of nebulae in the northern hemisphere, which extends further 
south than the former, has been named by Sir John Herschel 
the nebulous region of Pisces. It forms a zone, beginning 
with Andromeda, which it almost entirely incloses, stretch- 
mg beyond the breast and wings of Pegasus, and the band 
uniting the Fishes, and extending toward the southern galac- 
tic pole and Fomalhaut. A striking contrast to these accu 
mulations presents itself in the barren region lying near Per 
ECUS, Aries, Taurus, the head and chest of Orion, around Au 
riga, Hercules, Aquila, and the whole constellation of Lyra.1 
If we divide all the nebulae and clusters of stars contained 
in the Northern Catalogue (of Slough), and classified accord- 
ing to Right Ascension (as given in Sir John Herschel's Ob- 
servations at the Cape), into six groups of four hours each, 
we obtain the following result : 



R.Asc. Oh. 4h 311 

4 8 .... 179 
8 12 .... 606 



fl.Asc.l2h. 16h 850 

16 20 121 

20 . . . . 239. 



By a more careful separation, according to Northern and 
Southern Declination, we find that in the six hours' Right 
Ascension from 9h. — 15h., there are accumulated 1111 neb- 
ulae and clusters of stars in the northern hemisphere alone, 
viz. :X 



From 9h. lOh... 


.. 90 


Froml2h. 13h... 


.. 309 


10 11 .. 


. . 150 


13 14 ... 


.. 181 


11 12 .. 


.. 251 


14 15 .. 


.. 130. 



error of the press, the words south pole and north pole have been con- 
founded. 

* " In this region of Virgo, occupying about one eighth of the whole 
surface of the sphere, one third of the entire nebulous contents of the 
heavens are congregated." — Outlines, p. 596. 

t In reference to this barren region, see Observations at the Cape, 
$ 101, p. 135. 

X I liave based these numerical data on a computation of the numbers 
yielded by the projection of the northern heavens as given in Obtervor 
lions at the Cape, pi. xi. 



NEBULA. 29 

The actual northern maximum lies, therefore, between 
12h. and 13h., v«ry near the north galactic pole. Beyond 
that point, between 15h. and 16h. toward Hercules, the dim- 
inution is so rapid that the number 130 is followed directly 
by 40. 

The southern hemisphere presents not only a smaller num- 
ber, but a far more regular distribution of nebula3. Regions 
destitute of nebulse here frequently alternate with sporadic 
nebulae. An actual local accumulation, more dense, indeed, 
than the nebulous region of Virgo in the northern heavens, 
occurs only in the Great Magellanic Cloud, which alone con- 
tains as many as 300 nebulse. The immediate polar regions 
of both hemispheres are poor in nebulse, and to a distance of 
15° the Southern Pole is still more so than the Northern, in 
the ratio of 4 to 7. The present North Pole exhibits a small 
nebula, only 5 minutes' distance from it, while a similar neb- 
ulous body, which Sir John Herschel has aptly named Nebula 
polarissima Australis (No. 3176 of his Cape Catalogue, R. 
A. 9h. 27m. 56s. ; N. P. D. 179° 34' 14"), is situated at a dis- 
tance of 25 minutes from the South Pole. This paucity of 
stars in the south polar region, and the absence of any pole- 
star visible to the naked eye, were made the subject of bitter 
lamentation by Amerigo Vespucci and Vicente Yaiiez Pinzon, 
when, at the close of the fifteenth century, they penetrated 
far beyond the equator to Cape San Augustin, and when the 
former even expressed the erroneous opinion that the fine 
passage of Dante, "Jo mi volsi a man destra, e posi mente 

" and the four stars described as " non viste mai 

fuorcK alia prima gente,"" referred to antarctic polar stars. ^ 

* Humboldt, Examen Critique de VHist. de la Geographic, torn, iv., p. 
319. The Venetian Cadamosto (more properly called Alvise da Ca da 
Mosto) first turned his attention to the discovery of the position of a 
south polar star when in company with Antoniotto Usodimare, at the 
mouth of the Senegal, in 3 454, in the course of one of the many voy- 
ages in which the Portuguese engaged, under the auspices of the In- 
fante Don Henrique, for the purpose of advancing along the western 
shores of Africa, beyond the equator. " While I still see the north 
polar star," he writes, being then in about 13° north latitude, " I can 
not see the south polar star itself, but the constellation which I perceivt» 
toward the south is the Carro del ostro (wagon of the south). (Aloysit 
Cadam. Navig., cap. 43, p. 32 ; Ramusio, Ddle Navtgationi et Viaggi, 
vol. i., p. 107.) Could he have traced the figure of a wagon among 
some of the larger stars of the constellation Argo ? The idea that both 
poles had a constellation of the " Wain" or wagon appears to have been 
so universal in that age, that there is a drawing of a constellation per- 
fectly similar to Ursa Minor, supposed to have been seen by Cadamosto, 
both in the Itinerarium Portugallense, 1508, fol. 23, b, and in Grynaeua 



30 COSMOS. 

We have hitherto considered nebulae in reference to thedi 
number and their distribution in what we call the firmament 

(Novus Orbis, 1532, p. 58) ; while Ramusio (Navigationi, vol. i., p. 107), 
and the new Collecgao de Noticias para a Hist, e Geog. das Nagoes Ultra 
marinas (torn, ii., Lisboa, 1812, p. 57, cap. 39), in the place of the for- 
mer, give an equally arbitrary drawing of the Southern Cross. (Hum- 
boldt, Examen Crit. de VHist. de la G6ogr., torn, v., p. 236.) Since, ia 
the Middle Ages, and probably for the sake of replacing the two Dan- 
cers, xopevrai, of Hyginus {Poet.Astron., iii., 1), i. e., the Ludentes of the 
Scholiast of Germanicus, or the Custodes of Vegetius in the Lesser Wain, 
the stars (3 and y of Ursa Minor had been denominated the Guards, le 
due guardie, of the neighboring north pole, on account of their rotation 
round that point, and as this designation, as well as the habit of determ- 
ining polar altitudes by these Guards (Pedro de Medina, Arte de Nave- 
gar, 1545, lib. v., caps. 4-7, p. 183-195), was familiar to the European 
pilots of all nations in the northern seas, so erroneous conclusions led 
men to believe from analogy that they could recognize in the southern 
horizon the polar star which had so long been sought for. It was not 
until Amerigo Vespucci's second voyage (from May, 1499, to Septem- 
ber, 1500), when he and Vicente Yanez Pinzon (both voyages are per- 
haps one and the same) advanced as far in the southern hemisphere 
as Cape San Augustin, that they devoted themselves diligently, but to 
no purpose, to the search for a visible star in the immediate vicinity of 
the South Pole. (Bandini, Vita e Lettere di Amerigo Vespucci, 1745, p. 
70; Anghiera, Oceanica, 1510, dec. i., lib. ix., p. 96; Humboldt, Exa- 
men. Crit., torn, iv., p. 205, 319, 325.) The South Pole was then situ- 
ated within the constellation Octans, so that f3 of Hydrus, if we follow 
the reduction of Brisbane's Catalogue, had still a southern declination 
of fully 80° 5'. *' While I was engaged in observing the wonders of the 
southern heavens, and in vainly seeking for a pole-star, I was remind- 
ed," says Vespucci, in his letter to Pietro Francesco de' Medici, "of an 
expression made use of by our Dante, when, in the first chapter of the 
Purgatorio, he depicts a presumed passage from one hemisphere to the 
other, and in describing the Antarctic Pole, says, lo mi volsi a man des- 
tra In my opinion, the author intended in these verses to in- 
dicate the pole of the other firmament by his four stars {non viste mai 
fuorcK alia prima gents'). I am the more certain of this, because I act- 
ually saw four stars, which together formed a lozenge, and had a slight 
(?) movement." Vespucci refers to the Southern Cross, la croce mara- 
vigliosa of Andrea Corsali (Letter from Cochin, dated January 6, 1515, 
in Ramusio, vol. i., p. 177), whose name he did not then know; but 
which subsequently served to mark to all pilots the position of the South 
Pole (as/3 and y Urs. Min. indicated the North Pole. {Mim. de VAcad. 
des Sciences, 1666-1699, tom. vii., part 2. Paris, 1729, p. 58.) This 
constellation also served for determinations of latitude. (Pedro de Me- 
dina, Arte de Navegar, 1545, lib. v., cap. x.i., p. 204.) Compare my in- 
vestigation of the celebrated passage of Dante in the Examen Crit, 
de VHist. de la Geogr., tom. iv., p. 319-334. I there drew attention to 
the fact that a of the Southern Cross, which was carefully observed in 
modern times by Dunlop (1826), and by RUmker (1836) at Paramatta, 
is one of those stars whose multiple nature was first recognized in 1681 
and 1687 by the Jesuits Fontaney, No6l, and Richaud. {Hist, de VAcad. 
dep. 1686-1699, tom. ii.. Par., 1733, p. 19; M&amp;mde VAcad. dep. 1666- 
1699, tom. vii., 2, Par., 1729, p. 206 ; Lettres idijiantes, recueil vii., 1703i 



nebula:. 31 

—an apparent distribution which must not, however, be con- 
founded with their actual distribution through the region? of 
Bpace. "We now, therefore, proceed to the consideration of 
the remarkable differences presented by their individual forms, 
which are either regular (globular, more or less elliptical, an- 
nular, planetary, or resembling the photosphere surrounding 
a star) or irregular, and almost as difficult to classify as those 
of the aggregated aqueous vapor of our atmosphere — the 
clouds. The elliptical (spheroidal) form^ has been regarded 
as the normal type of nebulse ; this form is most readily re- 
solved into clusters of stars when it assumes a globular shape 
in the telescope ; but when, on the other hand, with instru- 
ments of equal powers, it appears much flattened, elongated 
in one dimension, and discoidal, it is less easy of resolution.! 
Gradual transitions of form from the round to the elongated, 
elliptical, or awl-shaped form, are of frequent occurrence in 
the heavens. (Fhilos. Transact., 1833, p. 494, pi. ix., figs. 
19-24.) The nebula is always condensed around one or more 
central points (nuclei). It is only by a discrimination between 
round and oval nebulce that we recognize double nebulce ; for 
as no relative motion is perceptible among the individual neb- 
ulous bodies, either in consequence of its absence or its ex- 
treme slowness, we are deficient in a criterion by which to 

p. 79.) This early recognition of binary systems, long before that of ^ 
Ursae Maj. {Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 185), is the more remarkable, as Lacaille, 
seventy years later, did not describe a Crucis as a double star; perhaps 
(as RUmker conjectures), because the main star and the companion were 
then not sufficiently distant from each other. (Compare Sir John Her- 
Bchel, Observations at the Cape, $ 183-185.) Richaud also discovered 
the binary character of a Centauri almost simultaneously with that of a 
Crucis, and fully nineteen years before the voyage of Feuillee, to whom 
Henderson erroneously attributed the discoveiy. Richaud remarks 
" that, at the time of the comet of 1689, the two stars which form the 
double star a Crucis were at a considerable distance from each other; 
but that in a twelve-feet refractor both parts of a Centauri could be dis« 
tinctly recognized, and appeared to be nearly in contact. 

* Observations at the Cape, $ 44, 104. 

t Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 140, and note. As we have already remarked in 
reference to clusters of stars {Ibid., p. 143), Mr. Bond, of the United 
States, succeeded, by means of the great space-penetrating power of 
his refractor, in completely resolving the very elongated, elliptical neb- 
ula of Andromeda, which, according to Bouillaud, had been already 
described before the time of Simon Marius in 985 and 1428. It has a 
reddish light. Near this celebrated nebula lies the still unresolved, 
but very similarly shaped nebula, discovered on the 27th of August, 
1783, by my honored friend, Miss Caroline Herschel, who died at an 
advanced age, universally esteemed. (Philos. Transact., 1833, No. 61 
of the Catalogue of Nebulae, fig. 52.) 



32 COSMOS. 

prove the existence of a mutual relation between the two, as 
in distinguishing loetween physicallij and merely optically 
double stars. Figures of double nebulae are given in the 
Philos. Transact, for the year 1833, figs. 68-71. Compare 
also Herschel, Outlines of Astr., § 878 ; Observ. at the Cape 
of Good Hope,h 120. 

Annular nebulae aire of the rarest occurrence. According 
to Lord Rosse, we are acquainted with seven of these bodies 
in the northern hemisphere ; the most celebrated of these is 
situated between /3 and y Lyrae (No. 57, Messier ; No. 3023 
of Sir John Herschel' s Catalogue), and was discovered in 
1779 by Darquier at Toulouse, when Bode's Comet passed 
near it. Its apparent size is nearly equal to that of Jupiter's 
disk, and its form is an ellipse, whose greater and lesser axes 
are in the ratio of 5 to 4. The interior of the ring is not 
black, but somewhat illumined. Sir William Herschel dis- 
covered some stars in the ring, which has since been entirely 
resolved by Lord Rosse and Mr. Bond.^ The splendid an- 
nular nebulae of the southern hemisphere, numbered 3680 and 
3686, appear, on the contrary, perfectly black in the interior 
of the rings. The last-named of the two is not elliptical, but 
perfectly round ;t all are probably annular clusters of stars. 
The increasing power of optical instruments appears, more- 
over, generally to render the contour of both elliptical and 
annular nebulae less defined ; thus, for instance, Lord E-osse's 
colossal telescope exhibits the annular nebula of Lyra in the 
form of a simple elHpse, with remarkable divergent, thread- 
like nebulous appendages. The transformation effected in a 
nebulous spot — Lord Rosse's Crab nebula — which appears in 
instruments of inferior power to be a simple elliptical body, 
is particularly striking. 

The so-called planetary nebulae, which were first observed 
by the elder Herschel, and which rank among the most re- 
markable phenomena of the heavens, although of less rare 
occurrence than annular nebulae, do not number, according 
to Sir John Herschel, more than 25, of which nearly three 
fourths lie within the southern hemisphere. These bodies 
present the most striking resemblance to planetary disks ; the 

* " Annular Nebulce.''^ — Ohservations at the Cape, p. 53 ; Outlines of 
Astr., p. 602. " Nebulcuse perfor^e.'^ — Arago, in the Annuaire for 1842, 
p. 423; Bond, in Schum., Asiron. Nachr., No. 611. 

t Ohservations at the Cape, p. 114, pi. vi., figs. 3 and 4. Compare 
also No. 2072 in the Philos. Transact, for 1833, j). 466. See Nichol, 
Thoughts on the System of the World, p. 21, pi. iv., and p. 22, pi. L 
fig 5. 



NEBULiE. 33 

greater number are round, or somewhat oval, and either 
sharply defined, or indistinct and vaporous at the margins. 
The disks of many of these nebulee present a very uniform 
light, w^hile others appear mottled, or of a pecuhar texture 
as if curdled. No trace of condensation round a central point 
has ever been observed. Lord E-osse has recognized five plan- 
etary nebulous spots to be annular nebulsB, having one or two 
central stars. The largest of these planetary nebulae is sit- 
uated in the Great Bear (near (i Ursse Maj.), and was discov- 
ered by.Mechain in 1781. The diameter of the disk''^ is 2' 
40". The planetary nebula in the Southern Cross (No. 3365, 
Observations at the Cape, p. 100), with a disk having a di- 
ameter scarcely equal to 12", exhibits the brightness of a star 
of the 6- 7th magnitude. Its hght is indigo-blue, and the 
same color, which is very remarkable in nebulae, is observed 
in three other objects of the same form, although in the lat- 
ter the blue is less intense.! The blue color of some plan- 
etary nebulae does not militate against the possibility of their 
being composed of small stars ; for we find blue stars not only 
as the individual members of a pair of double stars, but even 
stellar clusters composed entirely of blue stars, or of the lat- 
ter interspersed with small red and yellow stars. $ 

The question whether planetary nebulae are very remote 
nebulous stars, in which our telescopic vision is unable io rec- 
ognize the difference between a luminous central star and the 
vaporous envelope surrounding it, has already been considered 
in the beginning of my Delineation of Nature. k Would that 
Lord Rosse's colossal telescope might finally be the means of 

* If we consider the planetary nebula in the Great Bear to be a 
sphere having an apparent diameter of 2' 40", " and assume its distance 
to be equal to the known distance of 61 Cygni, we shall obtain an act- 
ual diameter for the sphere, which is seven times greater than the orbit 
described by Neptune." — Outlines, ^ 876. 

t Outlines, p. 603 ; Observations at the Cape, $ A7. There is an or- 
ange-red star of the eighth magnitude in the vicinity of No. 3365 ; but 
the planetary iiebul^ retains its deep indigo-blue color when the red 
star is not in the field of the telescope. The color is, therefore, not the 
effect of contrast. 

X Cosmos, vol. iii,, p. 136, 208, and note. The companion and the 
main star are blue, or bluish, in more than 63 double stars. Indigo- 
blue stars are intermixed in the splendid, many-colored clusters of stars, 
No. 3435 of the Cape Catalogue (Dunlop's Catalogue, No. 301). An en- 
tirely uniform blue cluster of stars is observed in the southern heavens 
(No. 573 of Dunlop ; No. 3770 of Sir John Herschel). This cluster has 
a diameter of 3^', with prolongations measuring 8' in length ; the stars 
are of the 14th and 16th magnitude. {Observations at the Cape, p. 119.) 

^ Cosmos, vol i., p. 85, and note. Compare Outlines, ^ 877. 

B2 



34 



COSMOS. 



elucidating the nature of these remarkable planetary vapor 
ous disks ! Although there is considerable difficulty in ac- 
quiring a clear conception of the complicated dynamic condi- 
tions under which, in a globular or spheroidally flattened stel- 
lar cluster, the rotating crowded suns, whose specific density 
is greater toward the center, constitute a system of equilibri- 
um ;* this difficulty increases still more in those circular, 
well-defined, planetary nebulous disks which exhibit a per- 
fectly uniform brightness, without any increase of intensity to- 
ward the center. Such a condition seems to depend less upon 
sphericity of form (the state of aggregation of many thousand 
small stars) than on the existence of a gaseous photosphere, 
which is supposed, as in our Sun, to be covered with a thin, 
untransparent, or very faintly illuminated stratum of vapor. 
Does the light in the planetary nebulous disk appear to be 
thus uniformly diffused simply in consequence of the great 
distance, which causes the difference between the center and 
the margins to disappear ? 

The fourth and last order of regular nebulae comprises Sir 
"William Herschel's nebulous stars, i. e., true stars surround- 
ed by a milky nebula, which is very probably connected with, 
and dependent upon, the central star. Very different opin- 
ions exist as to M^hether the nebula, which, according to Lord 
Rosse and Mr. Stoney, appears to be perfectly annular in some 
of these groups (Philos. Transact, for 1850, pi. xxxviii., figs. 
15 and '16), is self-luminous, forming a photosphere like our 
Sun, or whether (which, however, is less probable) it is sim- 
ply illumined by the central Sun. It was the opinion of Ber- 
ham, and to some extent also of Lacaille, who discovered 
many nebulous stars at the Cape of Good Hope, that the stars 
'iv^ere situated far from the nebulae on which they were pro- 
jected. Mairan appears (1731) first to have expressed the 
view that nebulous stars are surrounded by an atmosphere of 
light appertaining to them.f We even find that some of the 
larger stars (of the 7th magnitude, for instance, as No. 675 

* On the development of the dynamic relations manifested in the 
partial attractions in the interior of a globular cluster of stars, which ap- 
pears in a telescope of weak power as a round nebula increasing in 
density toward the center, see Sir John Herschel, in Outlines of As- 
tronomy, $ 866 and 872; Observations at the Cape, § 44, 111 to 113; 
Philoa. Transact, for 1833, p. 501 ; Address of the Preside7it in the 
Report of the Fifteenth Meeting of the British Association, 1845, p. 
xxxvii. 

t Mairan, Traiti de VAurore BorSale, p. 263 ; Arago, in the Annuaire 
for 1842, p. 403-413. 



NEBULiE. 35 

of the Catalogue of 1833) have a photosphere, whose diam. 
eter measures from 2' to 3'.^ 

The large nebulous masses of irregular configuration com- 
pose a class of nebulae differing entirely from those we have 
described as regular, and which are, at all events, faintly de- 
fined. They are characterized by the most variously un sym- 
metrical forms, having indefinite and confused outlines. These 
bodies, which constitute mysterious phenomena sui ge?ieris, 
have mainly given occasion to the opinions advanced in ref 
erence to the existence of cosmical clouds and self-luminous 
nebulce, supposed to be distributed through the regions of 
space, and to resemble the substratuni of the zodiacal light. 
These irregular nebulae, which cover a portion of the firma- 
ment several square degrees in extent, present a striking con- 
trast with the smallest of all the regular isolated and oval 
nebulous disks, which is equal in luminous intensity to a tel- 
escopic star of the 14th magnitude, and is situated between 
the constellations Ara and Apus, in the southern hemisphere.! 
No two of the unsymmetrical, diffused nebulous masses re- 
semble one another ;$ but, adds Sir John Herschel, from the 
experience of many years' observation, one thing observed in 
reference to them, and which gives them a peculiar charac- 
ter, is, that all are situated within or very near to the mar- 
gins of the Milky Way, and may be regarded as offshoots from 
it. On the contrary, the regularly shaped and well-defined 
small nebulous spots are partly scattered over the whole heav- 
ens, and partly compressed together in special regions, far 
from the Milky Way, as, for instance, in the northern hemi- 
sphere, in the regions of Virgo and Pisces. Although the large 
irregular nebulous mass in the sword of Orion is certainly sit- 
uated at a considerable distance from the visible margin of 

* In other instances these nebulous stars are only of the eighth to the 
ninth magnitude ; as Nos. 311 and 450 of the Catalogue of 1833, fig. 31 
having photospheres of 1' 30". {Outlines, § 879.) 

t Observations at the Cape, p. 117, No. 3727, pi. vi., fig. 16. 

X We meet with remarkable forms of irregular nebulse, as, for in- 
stance, the omega-shaped {Observations at the Cape, pi. ii.,fig- 1, No. 
2008), which has been investigated and described by Lamont, and by 
a meritorious North American astronomer, Mr. Mason, whose early loss 
is much to be lamented {Mem. of the Amer. Philos. Society, vol. vii., p 
117) ; a nebula having from 6 to 8 nuclei {Observations at the Cape, p 
19, pi. iii., fig. 4) ; the cometary tuft-like form in which the nebulous 
rays seem occasionally to expand, as from a star of the ninth magni- 
tude (pi. vi., fig. 18, Nos. 2534 and 3688) ; a silhouette profile, or bust- 
like outline (pi. iv., fig. 4, No. 3075) ; a fissure-like opening, inclosing 
a filiform nebula (No. 3501, pi. iv., fig. 2 ; Outlines, $ 883 ; Observationt 
ttihe Cape, $ 121). 



36 COSMOS. 

the Galaxy (fully 15°), still even it may perhaps helong to 
that prolongation of its branch which appears to lose itself 
from a and e Persei toward Aldebaran and the Hyades, and 
to which we have already referred at p. 147. The brilliant 
stars which gave early celebrity to the constellation of Orion, 
are, moreover, reckoned to belong to that zone of very large 
and probably less remote stars, whose prolonged direction in- 
dicates the vast circle of the Southern Galaxy, passing through 
e Orionis and a Crucis.=^ 

The opinion which at one time prevailed so extensivelyf 
of the existence of a galaxy of nehulcB intersecting the stellar 
Milky Way almost at right angles, has not been confirmed by 
more recent and accurate observations in reference to the dis- 
tribution of symmetrical nebulse in the firmament 4 There 
certainly are, as has already been observed, very great ac;cu- 
mulations at the northern pole, of the Galaxy, while a very 
considerable abundance of nebulous matter is also observed 
at the south galactic pole near Pisces ; but in consequence of 
the many interruptions which break the zone, we are unable 
to indicate any large circle connecting these poles together, 
and formed by a continued line of nebulae. William Her- 
schel, in advancing this view in 1784, at the close of his first 
treatise on the structure of the heavens, developed it with a 
caution worthy of such an observer, and from which doubt 
was not entirely excluded. 

Some of the irregular, or, rather, unsymmetrical nebulae 
(as those in the sword of Orion, near r] Argus in Sagittarius 
and in Cygnus), are remarkable for their extraordinary size ; 
others (as Nos. 27 and 51 of Messier's Catalogue) for their 
singular forms. 

It has already been noticed in reference to the large nebula 
in the sword of Orion, that Galileo never mentioned it, al- 
though he devoted so much attention to the stars between the 
girdle and the sword, § and even sketched a map of this re- 

* Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 147. Outlines, $ 785. 

t Cosmos, vol. i., p. 150, and note ; Sir John Herschel's first edition 
of his Treatise on Astronomy, 1833, in Lardner's Cabinet Cyclopedia, 
$ 616; Littrow, Theoretische Astronomic, 1834, th. ii., § 234. 

X See Edinburgh Review, January, 1848, p. 187, and Observations at 
the Cape, § 96, 107. " The distribution of the nebulae is not like that 
of the Milky Way," says Sir John Herschel, " in a zone or band en- 
circling the heavens ; or if such a zone can bo at all traced out, it is 
with so many interruptions., and so faintly marked out through by far 
the greater part of its circumference, that its existence as such can be 
hardly more than suspected." 

$ " There can be no doubt," writes Dr. Galle, " that the drawing'' 



NEBULiE. 3^ 



gion of the heavens. That which he names Nebulosa Ori 
mis, and dehneates in the vicinity oi NebidosaPr^sepe, hi. 
expressly declares to be an accumulation of small stars (s^e^ 
larum consiipatarum) in the head of Orion. In the draw- 
ing which he gives in the Siderius Nuncius, § 20, extend- 
inl from the girdle to the beginning of the right leg {a On- 
onis), I recognize the multiple star d above the star i. ihe 
instruments employed by Galileo did not magnify more than 
from eight to thirty times. It is probable that as the nebula 
in the sword is not isolated, but appears, when seen through 
imperfect instruments or a hazy atmosphere, like a halo round 
the star d, its individual existence and configuration may have 
escaped the notice of the great Florentine observer He was 
moreover, little inclined to assume the existence of nebulae^* 
It was not until fourteen years after Gahleo s death, m the 
vear 1656, that Huygens first observed the great nebula ol 
Orion, of which he gave a rough sketch in the Systeina Satur- 
nium, which appeared in 1659. "While,'' says this great 
man, " I was observing, with a refractor of twenty-five leet 
focal length, the variable belts of Jupiter, a dark central belt 
in Mars, and some faint phases of this planet, my attention 
was attracted by an appearance among the fixed stars, which, 
as far as I know, has not been observed by any one else, and 
which, indeed, could not be recognized, except by such pow- 
erful instruments as I employ. Astronomers enumerate three 
stars in the sword of Orion, lying very near one another. On 
one occasion, when, in 1656, 1 was accidentally observing the 
middle one of these stars through my telescope, I saw twelve 
stars instead of a single one, which, indeed, not unfrequentiy 

(Opere di Galilei, PaJova, 1744, toni. ii., p. 14, No. 20) "which you 
lav^e me inclades the girdle and sword o Orion and consequently alo 
fhe star 6: but it is difficult, owing to the striking inaccuracy of the 
draw n- to recognize the three small stars in the sword (the middle 
oS of wWch is e\ and which appear to the unaided eye to be placed 
?n a strli^ht line. I conjecture that you have correctly designated the 
B?a? fand that the bright star to the right and below, or the one imme- 
dfateiy above it, is 0^ Galileo expressly says, " In P^-o m\eg^^^^^^ 
Orionis Constellationem pingere decreveram: vervim. ^^ mgenti stel- 
larum copia, temporis vero inopia obrutus, aggressionem banc m aliara 
occaTionem distuli." Considedng Galileo's observation of the constel- 
latirof Orion, we are the more°struck by the circumstance that he 
40rtars wh?ch he thought he had counted between the ginl^e and^he 
Bword of Orion in a space often square degrees (Neni,F»^a dt Gahet 
vol ' , p. 208), should subsequently (accordmg to Lambert, Com.Z.| 
Briefe 1760, p. 155) have led himto the erroneous estimate of l,6o0,00a 
fgL L w^hole Ornament. (Struve, ^-r^^^X^^';^^^^ 
lb.) 



38 COSMOS. 

happens in using the telescope. Three of this number were 
almost in contact with one another, and four of them shone 
as if through a mist, so that the space around them, having 
the form drawn in the appended figure, appeared much bright- 
er than the rest of the sky, which was perfectly clear, and 
looked almost black. This appearance looked, therefoie, al- 
most as if there were a hiatus or interruption. I have fre- 
quently observed this phenomenon, and up to the present time 
as always unchanged in form ; whence it would appear that 
this marvelous object, be its nature what it may, is very 
probably permanently situated at this spot. I never observed 
any thing similar to this appearance in the other fixed stars." 
(The nebulous spot in Andromeda, described fifty-four years 
earlier by Simon Marius, must therefore either have been un 
known to him, or did not attract his attention.) That which 
has usually been regarded as nebulous matter, adds Huygens, 
" even the Milky Way, when seen through telescopes, exhib- 
its nothing nebulous, and is nothing more than a multitude 
of stars, thronged together in clusters."* The animation of 

* " Ex his autem tres ilhe pene inter se contiguee stellae, cumque his 
aliae quatuor, velut trans nebulara lucebant : ita ut spatium circa ip- 
sas, qua forma hie conspicitur, multo illustrius appareret rehquo omni 
cceIo ; quod cum apprime serenum esset ac cerneretur nigerrimum, ve- 
lut hiatu quodam interruptum videbatur, per quem in plagam magis hi- 
cidam esset prospectus. Idem vero in hanc usque diem nihil immutata 
facie saepius atque eodem loco conspexi ; adeo ut perpetuam illic sedem 
habere credibile sit hoc quidquid est portenti : cui certe simile aliud 
nusquam apud reliquas fixas potui animadvertere. Nam caeterte nebu- 
losae olim existimatae, atque ipsa via lactea, perspicillo inspectae, nullas 
nebulas habere comperiuntur, neque aliud esse quam plurium stellarum 
congeries et frequentia." — Christiani Hugenii, Opera varia, Lugd. Bat., 
1724, p. 540-541. " Of these, however, those three almost contiguous 
stars, and, with these, four others, shone, as it were, through a nebula, 
BO that the space around them, as is shown in this figure, is much more 
brilliant than all the rest of the sky ; and when this is very serene and 
appears quite dark, it seemed broken by a sort of gap, through which 
one looked upon a brighter region behind. The same thing I have 
since beheld over and over again, without any change in its appeamnce 
and in the same position, so that one might almost believe that this 
marvelous object, whatever it is, is permanently fixed there ; it is cer- 
tain I have nowhere else noticed any thing similar to this in the other 
fixed stars ; for those which have generally been considered as nebulte, 
and even the Milky Way itself, when seen through a telescope, arc found 
to have nothing nebulous about them, but are nothing more than a mul- 
titude of several stars clustered together." Huygens himself estimated 
the powers ho employed in his twenty-five feet refractor as equal to a 
hundred diameters (p. 538). Are the " quatuor stellae trans nebulam 
lucentes" the stars of the trapezium ? The small and very rough sketch 
(Tab. xlvii., fig. 4, Phenomenon in Orione Novum) represents only a group 



NEBULJE. 39 

Jn.ia first description testifies the freshness and depth of the 
impressions produced on his mind ; but how great is the dis- 
tance from this first sketch, made in the middle of the sev- 
enteenth century, and the somewhat less imperfect descrip- 
tions of Picard, Le Gentil, and Messier, to the admirable de- 
lineations of Sir John Herschel (1837), and of William C. Bond 
(1848), the Director of the Observatory at Cambridge, U. S. \^ 
The former of these two astronomers had the great ad- 
vantage! of observing the nebula in Orion since 1834, at the 
Cape of Good Hope, at an altitude of 60°, and with a twen- 
ty-feet reflector, by which means he was enabled to render 
his earlier delineations of 1824-1826 more perfect 4 The 
positions of 150 stars, mostly of from the fifteenth to the 
eighteenth magnitudes, in the vicinity of 6 Orionis, were de- 
termined. The celebrated trapezium, which is not surround- 
ed by a nebula, is formed of four stars of the fourth, sixth, 
seventh, and eighth magnitudes. The fourth star was dis- 
covered (in 1666 ?) by Dominique Cassini, at Bologna ;^ the 
fifth (y') in 1826, by Struve ; and the sixth (a), M^hich is 
of the thirteenth magnitude, in the year 1832, by Sir John 
Herschel. De Yico, the Director of the Observatory at the 
Collegio Romano, announced in the beginning of the year 
1839 that he had discovered three other stars in the trapezi- 
um with his great Cauchoix refractor. These have not been 
observed either by Sir John Herschel or Mr. Bond. That 
portion of the nebula nearest the almost unnebulous trapezi- 
um, and forming, as it were, the anterior part of the head 
above the throat, the regio Huygeniana, is speckled, and of 
a granular texture, and has been resolved into clusters of 
stars both by Lord Rosse's colossal telescope and by the large 

of three stars, near an indentation which one might certainly regard as 
the Sinus Magmis. Perhaps the drawing gives only the three stars in 
the trapezium, which range from the fom-th to the seventh magnitude. 
Dominique Cassini, moreover, boasts that he was the first who observed 
the fourth star. 

* William Cranch Bond, in the Transactions of the American Academy 
of Arts and Sciences, New Series, vol. iii., p. 87-96. 

t Observations at the Cape, $ 54-69, pi. viii. ; Outlines, $ 837 and 
885, pi. iv., fig. 1. 

X Sir John Herschel, in the Memoirs of the Astronomical Society, vol. 
ii., 1824, p. 487-495, pi. vii., viii. The latter of these gives the nomen- 
clature of the separate regions of the nebula in Orion, which have been 
explored by so many astronomers. 

^ Delambre, Hist, de V Astron. Modeme, torn, ii., p. 700. Cassini 
reckoned the appearance of this fourth star (" aggiunta della quarta 
Btella alle tre contigue") among the changes which had taken place in 
the nebula of Orion in his time. 



40 COSMOS, 

Cambridge (U. S.) refractor.* Man} positions of the smaller 
stars have been determined by accurate observers of the pres- 
ent day ; as, for instance, Lamont at Munich, and Cooper and 
Lassell in England. The first named of these employed a 
1200-fold magnifying power. Sir William Herschel was of 
opinion, from a comparison of his own observations made 
with the same instruments, from 1783 to 1811, that altera- 
tions had taken place in the relative brilliancy and in the 
outlines of the great nebula of Orion.f Bouilland and Le 
Gentil had maintained the same opinion in reference to the 
nebula in Andromeda ; but the thorough investigations of Sir 
John Herschel have rendered the occurrence of any such cos- 
mical changes, although formerly considered to be well estab- 
lished, exceedingly doubtful, to say the least. 

The large tiehula round t] Argus is situated in that por- 
tion of the Milky Way which extends from the feet of the 
Centaur, through the Southern Cross, toward the middle part 
of Argo, and is so distinguished by the intensity of its mag- 
nificent effulgence. The light emanating from this region is 
so extraordinary, that Captain Jacob, an accurate observer, 
and a resident in the tropical parts of India, remarks, entirely 
in harmony with my prolonged experience, " Such is the gen- 
eral blaze from that part of the sky, that a person is imme 
diately made aware of its having risen above the horizon, 
though he should not be at the time looking at the heavens, 
by the increase of general illumination of the atmosphere, re- 
sembling the effect of the young Moon."$ 

* " It is remarkable, however, that within the area of the trapezium 
no nebula exists. The general aspect of the less luminous and cirrous 
portion is simply nebulous and irresolvable, but the brighter portion, 
immediately adjacent to the trapezium, forming the square front of the 
head, is-shown with the eighteen-inch reflector broken up into masses 
(very imperfectly represented in the figure), whose mottled and cur- 
dling light evidently indicates, by a sort of granular texture, its consist- 
ing of stars, and when examined under the great light of Lord Rosse'a 
reflector, or the exquisite defining power of the great achromatic at 
Cambridge, U. S., is evidently perceived to consist of clustering stars. 
There can, therefore, be little doubt as to the whole consisting of stars, 
too minute to be discerned individually even with these powerful aids 
but which become visible as points of light when closely adjacent in the 
more crowded parts." — Outlines, p. 609. William C Bond, who made 
use of a twenty-five feet refractor, having a fourteen-inch objectglass, 
says, " There is a great diminution of light in the interior of the trapezi 
um, but no suspicion of a star." {Memoirs of the American Academy, 
New Series, vol. iii., p. 93.) 

+ Philoa. Transact, for the year 1811, vol. ci., p. 324. 

t Trans, of the Roy. Soc. of Edinb., vol. xvi., 1849, part iv., p. 4 15. 



NEBULA. 41 

The nebula, in the midst of which lies the star 77 Argus, 
which has become so celebrated for the alterations observed 
in the intensity of its light, covers a space of more than four 
sevenths of a square degree.^ The nebula itself, which is 
divided into many unsymmetrical masses of unequal lumin- 
ous intensity, nowhere exhibits the speckled, granular ap- 
pearance which admits of the assumption of its resolvability. 
It incloses a singularly shaped, oval vacancy, covered with a 
faint glimmer of light. A fine delineation of the entire ap- 
pearance, the result of two months' measurements, is given 
in Sir John Herschel's Observations at the Cape.\ This 
observer determined no less than 1216 positions of stars, 
mostly from the fourteenth to the sixteenth magnitudes, in 
the nebula of 77 Argus. These extend far beyond the nebula 
into the Milky Way, where they stand clearly forth on the 
deep black ground of the sky, and they are probably, there- 
fore, unconnected with, and far removed from, the nebula it- 
self. The whole contiguous portion of the Milky Way is, 
moreover, so rich in stars (not clusters), that by means of the 
telescopic star-gauges 3138 stars have been found for every 
mean square degree between R. A. 9h. 50m. and llh. 34m. 
These numbers even increase to 5093 in the sweeps for R. A. 
llh. 24m., that is to ^ay, for one square degree of the firma- 
ment, a number of stars greater than those which are visible 
to the naked eye in the horizon of Paris or Alexandria, from 
the first to the sixth magnitude. :j: 

The nebula in Sagittarius, which is of considerable size, 
appears as if composed of four separate masses (R. Asc. 17h. 
53m. ; N. P. Decl. 114° 21'), one of which is again three- 
membered. All are interrupted by spots free from nebulous 
matter, and the whole was imperfectly observed by Messier. § 

The nebulce in Cygnus are several irregular masses, one 
of which forms a very narrow divided band, passing through 
the double star ?/ Cygni. Mason was the first to recognize 
the connection of these masses, so widely different, by means 
of a singular cellular tissue. || 

The nebula in Vulpes was imperfectly seen by Messier (No 

* Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 177-179. 

+ Observ. at the Cape, § 70-90, pi. ix. Outlines, $ 887, pi. iv., fig. 2 

% Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 107. 

$ Observ. at the Cape, $ 24, pi. i., fig. 1, No. 3721 of the Catalogue 
Outlines, § 888. 

II The nebula iu Cygnus, partly in R. Asc. 20h. 49m. ; N. P. Decl 
58^ 27'. {Outlines, $ 891.) Compare Catalogue of 1833, No. 2092 
pi. xi., fig. 34. 



42 COSMOS. 

17 of his Catjilogue) when he was making an observation of 
Bode's Comet in 1779. Sir John Herschel was the first who 
delineated and accurately determined its position (R. Asc. 19° 
52' ; N. P. Decl. 67° 43'). This nebula, which is not of an 
irregular form, first received the name of the "Dumb-bell" 
on the application of a reflector with an eighteen-inch aper 
ture. (Philos. Transact, for 1833, No. 2060, fig. 26 ; Out 
lines, § 881.) This similarity to a dumb-bell entirely disap- 
peared in Lord Rosse's reflector of three-feet aperture.* (See 
his recent important delineation, Philos. Transact, for 1850, 
pi. xxxviii., fig. 17.) It was also successfully resolved into 
numerous stars, which, however, continued mixed with neb- 
ulous matter. 

The spiral nehula in the more northern of the Canes 
Venatici was discovered by Messier on the 13th of Octo- 
ber, 1773 (on the occasion of his discovery of the Comet), in 
the left ear of Asterion, very near rj (Benetnasch) in the tail 
of the Great Bear (No. 51 of Messier, and No. 1622 of the 
great Catalogue published in the Philos. Transact, for 1833, 
p. 496, fig. 25). This is one of the most remarkable phenom- 
ena in the firmament, both on account of its singular config- 
uration, and of the unexpected transformative efiect produced 
on its appearance by Lord E-osse's six-feet speculum. In Sir 
John Herschel's eighteen-inch reflector, the nebula presented 
the appearance of a spherical body, surrounded by a far-dis- 
tant ring, so that it exhibited, as it were, an image of our 
starry stratum with its galactic ring.f But in the spring of 
1845, the large Parsonstown telescope transformed the whole 
into a helicine twisted coil — a luminous spiral, whose convo- 
lutions appear unequal, and are prolonged at both extremi- 
ties, both in the center and outward, into dense, granular, 
globular nodules. Dr. Nichol made a drawing of this object, 
which was laid before the meeting of the British Association 
at Cambridge in 1845 by Lord Ilosse4 But the most per- 

* Compare pi. ii., fig. 2, with pi. v. in Thoughts on some important 
Points relating to the System of the World, 1846 (by Dr. Nichol, Pro- 
fessor of Astronomy at Glasgow), p. 22. " Lord Rosse," says Sir John 
Herschel, Outlines, p. 607, "describes and figures it as resolved into 
numerous stars with much intermixed nebula." 

t Cosmos, vol. i., p. 150, and note, where the nebula, No. 1622. is 
lermed a " brother-system." 

X Report of the Fifteenth Meeting of the British Association for the 
Advancement of Science, Notices, p. 4 ; Nichol, Thoughts, p. 23. (Com- 

f)are pi. ii., lig. 1, with pi. vi.) In the Outlines, $ 882, we find the fol- 
owing passage : " The whole, if not clearly resolved into stars, has a 
resolvable charactei*, which evidently indicates its composition." 



MAGELLANIC CLOUDS. 43 

feet delineation of this nebula has been given by Mr. John- 
stone Stoney. {Philos. Transact., 1850, part i., pi. xxxv., 
fig. 1.) A similar spiral form is observed in No. 99 of Mes- 
sier's Catalogue, which presents also a single central nucleus, 
and in other northern nebulae. 

It still remains for us to notice, more circumstantially than 
could be done in " the general delineation of Nature,"* an ob- 
ject vi^hich is unparalleled in the world of forms exhibited 
throughout the firmament, and by which the picturesque 
effect of the southern hemisphere — if I may be permitted to 
use the expression — is heightened. The two Magellanic 
Clouds, which were probably first named Cape Clouds by Port- 
uguese, and subsequently by Dutch and Danish pilots,! most 
strongly rivet the attention of travelers, as I can testify from 
personal experience, by the intensity of their light, their in- 
dividual isolation, and their common rotation round the South 
Pole, although at different distances from it. We learn, from 
the express mention and definite description of these circling 
clouds of fight by the Florentine, Andrea Corsali, in his trav- 
els to Cochin, and by the Secretary of Ferdinand the Catho- 
lic, Petrus Martyr de Anghiera, in his work De rebus O^ean- 
ids et Orbe Novo (dec. i., lib. ix., p. 96), that the designa- 
tion which refers to Magellan's circumnavigation is not the 
older name ;$ for the notices here indicated are both of the 
year 1515, while Pigafetta, the companion of Magellan, does 
not mention the nebbiette in his journal earlier than January, 
1521, when the ship " Victoria" passed through the Patago- 
nian Straits into the South Sea. The very old designation of 
" Cape Clouds" did not, moreover, arise from the vicinity of 
the more southern constellation of " Table Mount," since the 
latter was first introduced by Lacaille. The name would 
more probably seem to refer to the actual Table Mountain, 
and to the appearance of a small cloud on its summit, which 
was dreaded by mariners as portending the coming of a storm. 
We shall presently see that both the nubecul(^, which had 
been long observed in the southern hemisphere, although not 
definitely named, acquired with the spread of navigation, and 
the increasing animation of certain commercial routes, desig- 
nations which were derived from these very routes themselves. 

* Cosmos, vol. i., p. 85, and note. 

t Lacaille, iu the M6m. de VAcad., annee 1755, p. 195. This is an 
unfortunate confusion of terminology, in the same manner as Horner 
and Littrow call the Coal-bags Magellanic Spots, or Cape Clouds. 

t Cosmos, vol. ii., p. 287, and note. 



44 ' COSMOS. 

The constant navigation of the Indian Ocean, washing the 
shores of Eastern Africa, was the earUest means — especially 
since the time of the Lagides and the Monsun-navigation — of 
making mariners acquainted with the stars near the Southern 
Pole. As early as the middle of the tenth century, we find, 
as already observed, that the Arabs had given a name to the 
larger of the Magellanic Clouds. This designation is, accord- 
ing to Ideler's researches, identical with that of the Wliite 
Ox, elrbakar, of the celebrated astronomer Derwisch Abdur- 
rahman Sufi of E-ai, a city in the Persian province of Irak. 
In his Introduction to the Knoivledge of the Starry Heav- 
ens, which he composed at the court of the sultans of the dy- 
nasty of the Buyides, he says that "below the feet of the Suhel 
(by which he expressly means the Suhel of Ptolemy, Canopus, 
although the Arabian astronomers named many other large 
stars of Argo, el-sefna, Suhel) there is a ' white spot,' which 
is invisible both in Irak (in the district of Bagdad and in 
JSTedsch, ' Nedjed') and in the more northern and mountain- 
ous part of Arabia, but may be seen in the Southern Tehama, 
between Mecca and the extremity of Yemen, along the coast 
of the Red Sea."* The relative position of the White Ox to 
Canopus is here indicated with sufficient accuracy for the 
naked eye ; for the Right Ascension of Canopus is 6h. 20m., 
and the eastern margin of the larger Magellanic Clouds lies 
in Right Ascension 6h. The visibility of the Nubecula ma- 
jor in northern latitudes can not have been appreciably af- 
fected by the precession of the equinoxes since the tenth cen- 
tury, for the maximum distance from the north had already 
been attained long before that period. If we follow the re- 
cent determination of position for th« larger cloud by Sir John 
Herschel, we shall find that it was perfectly visible as far 
north as 17° in the time of Abdurrahman Sufi ; at the pres- 
ent time it is seen in about 18° north latitude. The south- 
ern clouds must therefore have been visible throughout the 
whole of southwestern Arabia, in Hadhramaut (noted for its 
frankincense) as well as in Yemen, the ancient seat of civil- 
ization of Saba, and the long-established colony of the Joctan- 
ides. The southernmost extremity of Arabia, at Aden, on 

* Ideler, Untersuchitngen uher den Ursprung vnd die Bcdeutung der 
Stemnamen, 1809, p. xlix., 262. The name Abdurrahman Sufi was 
contracted by Uiugh Beg from Abdurrahman Ebn-Omar Ebn- Moham- 
med Ebn-Sahl Abu'l-Hassan el-Sufi el-Razi. Ukigh Beg. who, like 
Nassir-eddin, amended the Ptolemaic star-positions from his own ob- 
servations (1437), admits that he boiTowed from Abdurrahman Sufi's 
work the positions of 27 southern stai's, not visible at Samarcand. 



MAGELLANIC CLOUDS. 45 

the Sfc-aits of Bab-el-Mandeb, is situated in 12° 45', and Lo- 
heia in 15° 44' north latitude. The settlement of many Ara- 
bian colonies on the eastern coast of Africa, between the trop- 
ics, north and south of the equator, naturally led to a more 
special knowledge of the southern stars. 

The western coasts of x*L£nca beyond the line were first 
visited by some of the more cultivated European pilots (espe- 
cially Catalanians and Portuguese). Undoubted documents, 
such as the Map of the World of Marino Sanuto Torsello, of 
the year 1306, the Genoese Portulano Mediceo (1351), the 
Planisferio de la Palatifia (1417), and the Mappa-mondo 
di Fra Mauro Camaldolese (between 1457 and 1459), prove 
that the triangular configuration of the southern extremity of 
the African Continent was known 178 years before the so- 
called ^rs^ discovery of the Cabo Tormentoso (Cape of Good 
Hope) by Bartholomseus Diaz, in the month of May, 1487.* 
The importance of such a commercial route, rapidly increas 
ing from the time of Gama's expedition, was, on account of 
the common aim of all West- African voyages, the occasion of 
the two Southern Clouds being designated by the pilots Capft 
Clouds, as remarkable celestial phenomena seen during voy- 
ages to the Cape. 

The constant endeavors made to advance along the eastern 
shores of America, beyond the equator, and even to the south- 
ern extremity of the continent, directed the attention of mar- 
iners uninterruptedly to the southern stars, from the period of 
Alonso de Hojeda's expedition, in which Amerigo Vespucci 
took part (in 1499), to that of Magellan and Sebastian del 
Cano in 1521, and of Garcia de Loaysa,t with Francisco de 

* See my geographical investigations on the discovery of the south- 
ern extremity of Africa, and on the stntements of Cardinal Zurla and 
Count Baldelli in the Examen Crit. de VHist. de la Giographie aux quin- 
zieme et seizieme siecles, tom. i., p. 229-348. The discovery of the Cape 
of Good Hope, which Martin Behaim calls the Terra Fragosa, and not 
Cabo Tormentosa, was made, singularly enough, when Diaz CB.me from 
the east (from the Bay of Algoa, 33° 47' south latitude, and more than 
7° 18' east of Table Bay). — Lichtenstein, in Das Vaterlu7idi$che Mtise- 
urn, Hamburgh, 1810, $ 372-389. 

t The merit of the discovery of the southernmost extremity of the 
new continent in 55"^ south latitude (whose importance has not been 
sufficiently estimated), is due to Francis de Hoces, who commanded 
one of the ships of the expedition of Loaysa in 1525. It is very char- 
acteristically described in Urdaneta's Journal by the words acabamiento 
de tierra, " the ceasing of land." De Hoces probably saw a portion of 
Terra del Fuego west of Staten Island, for Cape Horn is situated, ao 
cording to Fitzroy, in 55"^ 58' 41". — See Navarette, Viages y descubrim. 
de los Espanolesy tom. v., p. 28, 404. 



46 COSMOS. 

Hoces in 1525. It would appear from the journals still ex- 
tant, and from the historical testimony of Anghiera, that the 
southern stars were made the special objects of attention dur- 
ing the voyage in which Amerigo Vespucci and Vicente Yanez 
Pinzon discovered Cape San Augustin in 8° 20' south lati- 
tude. Vespucci boasts on this occasion of having seen three 
Canopi (one dark, Canopofosco; and two bright stars, Cano- 
pi risplendenti). We find from an attempt made by Ideler, 
the ingenious author of works on the " Names of the Stars" 
and on " Chronology," to explain Vespucci's very confused 
description of the southern heavens, in his letter to Lorenzo 
Pierfrancesco de' Medici, of the party of the " Popolani," that 
Vespucci used the name in nearly as indefinite a manner as 
the Arabian astronomers had used the word Suhel. Ideler 
shows that the '' canopo fosco nella via lattea'' must have 
been the black spot, or large coal-sack in the Southern Cross ; 
while the position of three stars, in which are supposed to be 
recognized a, (i, and y of Hydrus, renders it very probable 
that the " canopo risplendente di notabile grandezza" (of 
considerable extent) is the Nubecula Major, and the second 
risplende7ite the Nubecula Minor.^ It is very singular that 
Vespucci should not have compared these recently-noticed 
celestial objects to clouds, as « all other observers had done. 
One would have thought the comparison irresistible. Peter 
Martyr Anghiera, who was personally acquainted with all 
the discoverers, and whose letters were written under the 
vivid impression excited in his mind by their narratives, de- 
scribes, with striking truthfulness, the mild but unequal efful- 
gence of the nubecula3. He says, " Assecuti sunt Portugallen 
ses alterius poli gradum quinquagesimum araplius, ubi punc- 
tum (polum ?) circumeuntes quasdam nubeculas licet intueri, 
veluti in lactea via sparsos fulgores per universi cobH globum 
intra ejus spatii latitudinem."t The exceeding fame, and 

* Humboldt, Examen Crit. de la Giogr., torn, iv., p. 205, 295-316 
torn, v., p. 225-229, 235. Ideler, Sternnamen, ^ 346. 

t Petrus Martyr Angh., Oceanica, dec. iii., lib. i., p. 217. I can 
prove from the numerical data in dec. ii., lib. x., p. 204, and dec. iii., 
lib X., p. 232, that the portion of the Oceanica, in which the Magellanic? 
Clouds are referred to, was written between 1514 and 1516, and there 
fore immediately after the expedition of Juan Diaz de Solis to the Rio 
de la Plata (then known as the Rio de Solis, una mar dulce). The lati- 
tudes are much exaggerated. 

f ** The Portuguese extended their discoveries to within less than 50 
degrees of the South Pole, where they plainly observed certain nebulre 
moving round the point (pole?), like the luminous spots scattered ia 



MAGELLANIC CLOUDS. 47 

the long duration of Magellan's circumnavigation (from Au- 
gust, 1519, to September, 1522), and the long sojourn of a 
numeJ-ous crew under the southern sky, obHterated the re- 
membrance of all earher observations, and spread the name 
of the Magellanic Clouds among all the sea-faring nations 
of the Mediterranean. 

We have thus shown by a single example how the exten- 
sion of the geographical horizon southward opened a new 
field to contemplative astronomy. There were four objects 
to which the attention of pilots was especially directed in the 
new hemisphere, viz., the search for a southern polar star, the 
form of the Southern Cross, which assumes a vertical position 
when it passes through the meridian of the place of observ- 
ation, the Coal-sacks, and the circling clouds of light. We 
learn from the treatise on the art of navigation [Arte de Nav- 
egar, lib. v., cap. 11), by Pedro de Medina, which has been 
translated into many languages, and first appeared in 1545, 
that the meridian altitudes of the " Cruzero" were used as 
early as the first half of the sixteenth century for the determ- 
inations of latitude. Measurement soon succeeded the mere- 
ly contemplative observation. The first work on the position 
of stars contiguous to the antarctic pole was based on the dis- 
tances of known stars of the Rudolphine Tables, as calcula- 
ted by Tycho Brahe. This work, as I have already observed,* 
was composed by Petrus Theodori of Embden, and Friedrich 
Houtman of Holland, who navigated the Indian Seas about the 
year 1594. The results of their measurements were speedi- 
ly embodied in the Star- Catalogues and celestial globes of 
Blaeuw (1601), of Bayer (1603), and of Paul Morula (1605). 
Such were the materials for the foundation of the topography 
of the southern heavens before Halley (1677), and before the 
meritorious astronomical researches of the Jesuits Jean de 
Fontaney, Richaud, and Noel. The intimate connection be- 
tween the history of astronomy and that of geography thus 
indicates those memorable epochs in which (scarcely two 
hundred and fifty years ago) men first acquired the knowl- 
edge necessary for the completion of the cosmical image of 
the firmament and of the configuration of continents. 

The Magellanic Clouds, the larger of which covers a ce- 
lestial space of forty-two, and the smaller a space of ten 
square degrees, certainly produce, at first sight, the same 

the Milky Way throughout the arch of heaven within tho breadth of 
that space."] 

* Cosmos, vol. ii., p. 287; vol. iii., p. 112, 138. 



48 COSMOS. 

impression on tlie unaided eye as might be excited by two 
bright portions of the Milky Way, equal in size and isolated 
in position. The smaller cloud entirely disappears in clear 
moonlight, while the larger one only loses a considerable por- 
tion of its brightness. Sir John Herschel's delineation of 
these objects is admirable, and accurately corresponds with 
the vivid impressions excited in my own mind during my so- 
journ in Peru. Astronomy is indebted to the laborious re- 
searches of this observer at the Cape of Good Hope in 1837, 
for the first accurate analysis of this most wondrous aggrega- 
tion of heterogeneous elements. =^ He found a large number 
of individual and scattered stars, stellar swarms and globular 
clusters of stars, and both oval regular and irregular nebulae 
more closely thronged together than in the nebulous zone of 
Virgo and Coma Berenices. The nubecula can not, there- 
fore, from this condition of complicated aggregation, be re- 
garded, as has too often been done, either as exceedingly 
large nebulae, or as detached portions of the Milky Way ; 
for, with the exception of a small zone lying between the 
constellation Ara and the tail of the Scorpion, globular stel- 
lar clusters and oval nebulae are of rare occurrence in the 
Galaxy, t 

The Magellanic Clouds are not connected with one anoth- 

* Cosmos, vol. i., p. 85, and note. See Observ. at the Cape, p. 143- 
164; pi. vii. gives a representation of the Magellanic Clouds as tliey ap- 
pear to the naked eye ; pi. x. the telescopic analysis of the Nubecula 
Major, and pi. xi., fig. 4 ($ 20-23), affords a special view of the nebula 
Doradfis. — Outlines, $ 892-896, pi. v., fig. 1, and James Dunlop in the 
Philos. Transact, for 1828, parti., p. 147-151. So erroneous w^ere the 
views of the earlier observers, that the Jesuit Fontaney, who was great- 
ly esteemed by Dominique Cassini, and to whom we are indebted for 
many valuable astronomical observations in India and China^ wrote as 
follows so recently as 1685 : " Le grand et le petit nuages sont deux 
choses singulieres. lis ne paraissent aucunement un amas d'etoiles 
comme Praesepe Cancri, ni meme une lueur sombre, comme la nebu- 
leuse d'Andromede. On n'y voit presque rieu avec de tres grandes 
lunettes, quoique sans ce secours on les voie fort blancs, particuliere- 
ment le grand nuage." " The lai-ge and the small cloud are both very 
remarkable objects. They do not appear a mere mass of stars, like 
Praesepe in Cancer, nor are they a faint light, like the nebula in An- 
dromeda. Very little is to be seen within these bodies even with large 
instruments, although when observed without such optical aid they ap 
pear very white, and this is especially the case with the large cloud." 
— Lettre du Pere de Fontaney an Pere de la Chaize, Confesseur du Roi, 
in the Lettres Edijiantes, Recueil vii., 1703, p. 78; and Hist, de VAcad. 
de$ Sciences dep. 1686-1699 (tom. ii., Paris, 1733), p. 19. In my de- 
Bcription of the Magellanic Clouds, in the text, I have excli^sively fol. 
lowed Sir John Herschel's work. 

t Cosmos, voL iii., p. 145, and note. 



MAGELLANIC CLOUDS. 49 

er or with the Milky Way by any appreciable nebulous vapor. 
If we except the cluster of stars in the constellation Toucan,* 
Nubecula Minor is situated in a portion of the heavens bar- 
ren of stars, and Nubecula Major in a less starless region. 
The form and internal structure of the latter are so involved 
that it presents many separate masses (as seen in No. 2878 
of Herschel's Catalogue), which present an accurate image 
of the aggregate condition of the whole clouds. The con- 
jecture advanced by the meritorious observer Horner, that 
the clouds were once parts of the Milky Way, in which we 
can, as it were, recognize their original place, is a myth, and 
quite as unfounded as the assertion that they have exhibit- 
ed, since Lacaille's time, a progressive movement — an altera-, 
tion of position. Their position was incorrectly given in con- 
sequence of the indistinctness of their margins, when seen 
through the older telescope having smaller apertures than 
our more recently constructed instruments ; and Sir John 
Herschel states that the lesser cloud is inserted about Ih. 
Rt. Asc. out of its true position, in all celestial globes and 
star-maps. According to him, Nubecula Minor lies between 
the meridians of Oh. 28m. and Ih. 15m., N. P. Decl. 162^ 
and 165° ; Nubecula Major in E,t. Asc. 4h. 40m.— 6h. Om., 
and N. P. Decl. 156° and 162°. In the former he has cata- 
logued according to right ascension and declination no less 
than 919 stars, nebulse, and clusters, and in the latter 244. 
With a view of separating the three classes, I have counted 
the objects in the catalogue, which I find gives for 

Stars. Nebulas. Clusters. 

Nubecula Major 582 291 46 

Nubecula Minor 200 37 7 

The inconsiderable number of nebulsB contained in Nubecula 
Minor is very striking, for we find that, compared to the neb- 
ulae in Nubecula Major, they are only as 1 : 8, while the ra- 
tio of the isolated stars is about 1:3. The catalogued stars, 
almost 800 in number, are for the most part of the 7th and 
8th magnitudes ; some few belong even to the 9th and 10th 
magnitudes. There is in the middle of the larger cloud a 
nebula, noticed by Lacaille (30 Doradus, Bode, No. 2941 of 
Sir John Herschel's Catalogue), which is said to resemble no 
other nebulous body in form. Although it occupies scarcely 
ji gth of the area of the whole cloud. Sir John Herschel has 
determined the position of 105 stars of from the 14th to the 

* Cosmos, vol. ill., p. 142, and note. 
Vol. IV.— C 



60 COSMOS. 

16th magnitude in this space. These stars are projected on 
the wholly unresolved, uniformly bright and unspeckled neb- 
ula.=^ 

The Black Specks which attracted the attention of Portu- 
guese and Spanish pilots as early as the close of the fifteenth 
and the beginning of the sixteenth centuries, circle round the 
southern pole opposite to the Magellanic Light-clouds, al- 
though at a greater distance from it. They are probably, as 
already remarked, the Ca7iopo fosco of the "three Canopi," 
described by Amerigo Vespucci in his third voyage. I find 
the first definite notice of these spots in the first Decade of 
Anghiera's work, ''De Rebus Oceanicis"" (Dec. i., lib. 9, ed. 
1533, p. 20, b). "Interrogati a me nautas qui Vicentium Ag- 
nem Pinzonum fuerant comitati (1499), an antarcticum vide- 
rint polum : stellam se nullam huic Arcticse similem, quso 
discerni circa punctum (polum ?) possit, cognovisse inquiunt. 
Stellarum tamen aliam, ajunt, se prospexisse faciem den- 
samque quandam ab horizonte vaporosam caliginem, qusB 
oculos fere obtenebraret."! The word Stella is used here for 
a celestial constellation, and the narrators may not have ex- 
plained themselves very distinctly in reference to a caligo 
which obscured their sight. Father Joseph Acosta, of Me- 
dina del Campo, gives a more satisfactory account of the 
Black Specks and the cause of this phenomenon. He com- 
pares them, in his Historia Natural de las Indias (lib. i., 
cap. 2), to the echpsed portion of the Moon's disk in respect 
to color and form. " As the Milky "Way," he says, "is more 
brilliant because it is composed of denser celestial matter, and 
hence gives forth more light, so likewise the Black Specks, 
which are not visible in Europe, are entirely devoid of light, 
because they constitute a portion of the heavens which is 
barren, i. e., composed of very attenuated and transparent 
matter." The error of a distinguished astronomer in sup- 
posing that this description referred to the spots of the Sun, J 
seems scarcely less singular than that the missionary Richaud 

* See Observ. at the Cape, § 20-23 and 133, the beautiful drawing, pi. 
ii., fig. 4, and a special map of the graphical analysis.— PL x., as well 
as Outlines, $ 896, pi. v., fig. 1. 

t " I asked some mariners who had accompanied Vicentius Agnes 
Pinzo (1499) whether they saw the antarctic pole, and they told me 
that they did not observe any star like our North Star, which may be 
Been about the arctic pole, but that they noticed stars in another forna, 
having the appearance of a dense and dark vapor rising frcxn the hori- 
«on, which almost obscured their vision. 

X Cosmos, vol. ii., p. 287, and note. 



THE COAL-SACKS. 51 

(1689) should have mistaken Acosta's ''manchas negras'' for 
the luminous Magellanic Clouds.* 

Richaud, moreover, like the earliest pilots, speaks of the 
Coal-sacks in the plural, mentioning two, of which the large 
one was situated in the constellation of the Cross, and an- 
other in Charles's Oak ; the latter, according to other descrip- 
tions, was subdivided into two distinct specks. These were 
described by Feuillee in the early part of the eighteenth 
century, and by Horner (in a letter to Olbers, written from 
Brazil in 1804), as undefined, and having confused outlines.! 
I was unable, during my residence in Peru, to discover any 
thing definite as to the Coal-sacks in Charles's Oak ; and as 
I was disposed to ascribe this to the low position of the con- 
stellation, I applied for information to Sir John Herschel and 
to Riimker, the director of the Observatory at Hamburgh, 
who had been in far more southern latitudes than myself. 
Notwithstanding their endeavors, they were equally unsuc- 
cessful in discovering any thing that could be compared for 
definiteness of outline and intensity of blackness with the 
Coal-sack in the Cross. Sir John Herschel is of opinion that 
we can not speak of a plurality of Coal-sacks, unless we would 
include under that head every ill-defined and darker portion 
of the heavens, as the regions between a Centauri and fS and 
y Trianguli,$ between rj and 6 Argus, and more especially 
the barren portion of the Milky Way in the Northern heav- 
ens, between e, a, and y Cygni.^ 

The longest known Black Speck in the Southern Cross, 
and the one which is also the most striking as seen by the 
naked eye, is of a pear-like shape, and lies on the eastern 
side of that constellation, in 8° long, and 5° lat. This large 
space presents one visible star of the 6th to the 7th magni 
tude, together with a large number of telescopic stars, vary 
ing from the 11th to the 13th magnitudes. A small group 
of 40 stars lies nearly in the center. ll The paucity of stars, 
and the contrast with the magnificent effulgence of the neigh- 

* M^m. de V Acad, des Sciences dep. 1666 jusqu'a 1699, t. vii., partie 2 
(Paris, 1729), p. 206. 

t Letter to Olbers from St. Catharina (January, 1804), in Zach's 
Monatl. Correspondenz zur Beford. der Erd- nnd Himmels-Kunde, bd. 
X., p. 240. See, on Feuillee's observation and rough sketch of the black 
spot in the Southern Cross, Zach, Op. cit., bd. xv., 1807, p. 388-391. 

% Observ. at the Cape, pi. xiii. § Outlines of Astronomy, p. 531, 

II Observ. at the Cape, p. 384, No. 3407, of the catalogue of nebulae 
and clusters. (Compare Dunlop in the Philos. Transact, for 1828, p. 
149, and No. 272 of his Catalogue.) 



52 COSMOS. 

boring heavens, are assigned as the causes of the remarkable 
blackness of this portion of the firmament. This opinion, 
which has been generally maintained since Lacaille's time,* 
has been especially confirmed by the " gauges" and " sweeps" 
made round the region where the Milky Way appears as if 
covered by a black cloud. The Coal-bag yielded from seven 
to nine telescopic stars for every sweep, but never an entirely 
blank field ; while in a field of equal size the margins pre- 
sented from 120 to 200 stars. This mode of explanation, 
which ascribes the darkness to contrast alone, did not, al- 
though perhaps incorrectly, appear quite satisfactory to me 
while I was in a tropical region, and remained under the 
vivid impression produced on my mind by the aspect of the 
southern heavens. "William Herschel's considerations on 
wholly starless regions in Scorpio and Serpentarius, and 
which he has termed "openings in the heavens," led me to 
the idea that the starry strata lying behind one another in 
such regions may be less dense, or even wholly interrupted, 
and that our instruments being insufficient to penetrate to 
these last strata, "we look into the remote regions of space, 
as through tubes." I have already elsewhere noticed these 
openings,! and the effects of perspective on such interruptions 
in the starry strata have again been lately made the subject 
of earnest consideration. $ 

The extreme and most remote strata of self-luminous cos- 
mical bodies — the distances of nebulae — all that has been 
considered in the last seven sidereal or astrognostic portions 
of this work, fill the imagination and the speculative mind 
of man with images of time and space surpassing his powers 
of comprehension. 

* " Cette apparence d'un noir fonc§ dans la partie Orientale de la 
Croix du Sud, qui frappe la vue de tous ceux qui regardent le cie 
austral, est causee par la vivacite de la blancheur de la voie lactee qui 
renferme I'espace noir et I'entoure de tous cotes." " The appearance 
of deep black in the eastern portion of the Southern Cross, which 
strikes all who observe the heavens in those regions, is owing to the 
intensity of the whiteness of the Milky Way surrounding the black 
space on every side." — Lacaille, in the M6m. de V Acad, des Sciencea, 
annee 1755 (Paris, 1761), p. 199. 

t Cosmos, vol. i., p. 152, and note. 

I " When we see," says Sir John Herschel, " in the Coal-sack (near 
a Crucis) a sharply-defined oval space free from stars, it would seem 
much less probable that a conical or tubular hollow traverses the whole 
of a starry stratum, continuously extended from the eye outward, than 
that a distant mass of comparatively moderate thickness should be sim 
ply perforated from side to side." — Outlines, $ 702, p. 532. 



THE SOIiAR REGION. 55 

However wonderful are the improvements made in optical 
instruments within scarcely sixty years, we are at the same 
time too well acquainted with the difficulties of their con- 
struction to indulge in the bold and even unlicensed antici 
pations so ardently cherished by the intellectual Hooke from 
1663 to 1665."^ Moderation in the expectations entertained 
will be the most likely to lead to their fulfillment. Each 
succeeding generation has reaped the noblest and most ex 
alted results from the triumphs of free intellect in the differ- 
ent stages to which art has gradually exalted itself. Without 
attempting to express in definite numbers the distances to 
which the space-penetrating powers of telescopic vision may 
already reach, and without attaching much confidence to 
such numbers, the knowledge of the velocity of light yet pro- 
claims that the appearance of the remotest star — the light- 
generating process on its surface — is the " most ancient sens- 
uous evidence of the existence of matter."! 



(3. The Solar Region. 

planets and their satellites. comets. ring op the 

zodiacal light. swarms of meteor-asteroids. 

On passing, in the Uranological portion of the physical 
description of the universe, from the heaven of the fixed stars 
to our solar and planetary system, we descend from the great 
and universal to the relatively small and special. The do- 
main of the Sun is the domain of one individual fixed star 
among the millions revealed to us in the firmament by tel- 
escopic aid — the limited space in which very various cosmical 
bodies, in obedience to the direct attraction of a central body, 
revolve around it in more or less extended orbits, whether 
they are isolated or encircled by other bodies similar to them- 
selves. Among the stellar bodies whose arrangement we 
have endeavored to consider in the sidereal portion of the 
Uranology, there is, indeed, a class of those millions of tele- 
scopic fixed stars — double stars — which exhibit special, bi 
nary, or multiple systems ; but notwithstanding the analogy 
presented by the forces by which they are impelled, they yet 
differ in their natural character from our solar system. In 

* Lettre de Mr. Hooke k M. Auzout, in the M4m. de VAcadimie, 
1666-1699, torn, vii., partie ii., p. 30, 73. t Cosmos, vol. i , p. 154 



54 • COSMOS. 

them, self-luminous fixed stars revolve round one common 
center of gravity, which is not filled with visible matter ; 
while in our solar system dark cosmical bodies rotate around 
a self-luminous body, or, to speak more definitely, around one 
common center of gravity, which lies at different times either 
within or without the central body. " The great ellipse 
which the Earth describes round the Sun is reflected in a 
small perfectly similar one, in which the central point of the 
Sun moves round its own and the Earth's common center of 
gravity." In general notices like the present, we need hard- 
ly enter into any special consideration of the question as to 
whether the planetary bodies, among which we must class 
interior and exterior comets, may not be capable, at least in 
part, of generating some special light of their own, in addition 
to that which they receive from the central body. 

We have hitherto acquired no direct evidence of the exist- 
ence of dark planetary bodies revolving round other fixed 
stars. The faintness of the reflected light would prevent 
their ever being visible to us, if, as Kepler conjectured (long 
before Lambert), such bodies actually revolve round every 
fixed star. If the nearest fixed star, a Centauri, be 226,000 
times the Earth's distance, or 7523 times the distance of Nep- 
tune ; if a very distant comet, that of 1680 (to which has been 
ascribed, although on very uncertain data, a revolution of 
8800 years), is twenty-eight times the distance of Neptune 
from our solar system when in its aphelion, then the distance 
of the fixed star a Centauri is still 270 times greater than 
the distance of our solar system from the aphelion of the most 
remote comet. The light of Neptune is reflected to us from 
a distance thirty times greater than our distance from the 
Sun. If, by the future construction of more powerful tele- 
scopes, three additional planets should be recognized, each 
situated at about 100 times the Earth's distance from the 
other, even this would not amount to the eighth part of the 
distance int'ervening to the aphelion of the comet referred to, 
or to the 2200th part of the distance^ which the reflected 

* See Cosmos, vol. i., p. 109, 148, where I based my calculations on 
the distance of Uranus, which then constituted the extreme known 
boundary of the planetaiy system. If we assume the distance of Nep- 
tune from the Sun to be 3004 times that of the Earth, the distance of 
a Centauri from the Sun would still be 7523 times that of Neptune, the 
parallax being assumed as 0' -9128 {Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 191),. yet the 
distance of 61 Cygni is nearly two and a half, and that of Sirius (with 
a parallax of 2"-230) four times that of a Centauri. The distance of 
Neptune from the Sun is about 2484 millions of geographical miles, and 



THE SOLAR REGION. 55 

light of a satellite revolving round a Centauri would have 
to traverse in order to reach our telescopic vision. But is it 
absolutely necessary that we should assume the existence of 
ratellites around the fixed stars ? For when we cast a glance 
at the subordinate particular systems within our large plan- 
etary system, we find that, notwithstanding the analogies 
which may present themselves in planets attended by many 
satellites, there are others, such as Mercury, Venus, and Mars, 
which have no attendant moons. If we disregard that which 
is merely possible, and limit ourselves to the consideration of 
that which is actually explored, we shall be vividly impressed 
with the idea that the solar system, especially in the great 
mutual connection revealed to us during the last ten years, 
yields the richest image of the evident and direct relations 
borne by many cosmical bodies to a special one. 

The more limited sphere of the planetary system afibrds 
by its very limitation undoubted advantages, both as to the 
certainty and correctness of the facts ascertained by measuring 
and calculating astronomy, over the results of a contempla- 
tion of the heaven of the fixed stars. Many of these results 
are only connected with contemplative astronomy, through the 
medium of stellar swarms and nebulous groups, as well as of 
the insecurely-based photometric arrangement of the stars. 
The most certain and brilliant portion of astrognosy is the 
determination of positions by right ascension and declination 
— a department of astronomical science that has been very 
extensively improved and increased in our own day, in refer- 
ence to isolated fixed stars, double stars, stellar masses, and 
nebulae. Equally difficult, although more or less accurately 
measurable relations likewise present themselves in the prop- 
er motion of the stars — the elements from which their paral- 
laxes are determined — telescopic star-gauging, which leads 

that of Uranus, according to Hansen, about 1586 millions. The dis- 
tance of Sirius amounts, according to Galle (assuming the parallax 
computed by Henderson), to 896,800 radii of the Earth's orbit, or 
74,188,000 millions of geographical miles, a distance which gives four- 
teen years for the passage of light. The aphelion of the comet of 1680 
is forty-four times the distance of Uranus, and therefore twenty-eight 
times that of Neptune from the Sun. According to these assumptions, 
the Sun's distance from the star a Centauri is nearly 270 times that of 
this comet in its aphelion, which we regard as the minimum of the very 
bold estimates of the radius of the solar system (see p. 204). The es. 
timate of such numerical relations has, at all events, this merit, not- 
withstanding other defects, that the assumption of a very high standard 
of measurement of space leads to results which may be expressed in 
•mailer numbers 



5G COSMOS. 

us to the distribution in space of cosmical bodies — ^the pericdfc 
of variable stars — and the slow revolution of double stars. 
That which, from its very nature, is not amenable to meas- 
urement, such as the relative position and configuration of 
starry strata or rings of stars, the arrangement of the uni- 
verse, and the effects of powerfully metamorphic physical 
forces=^ in the sudden appearance or extinction of the so-called 
new stars, excite the mind the more deeply and vividly, its 
touching on the confines of the graceful domain of fancy. 

We purposely abstain in the following pages from entering 
on the consideration of the connection existing between our 
solar system and the systems of other fixed stars, nor shall we 
revert to the question of that subordination and annexation 
of cosmical systems which might almost be said to force it- 
self on our notice from intellectual necessity ; nor yet will 
we consider whether our central body, the Sun, may not it- 
self stand in some planetary dependence on a higher system 
— not even, perhaps, as a main planet, but merely as a plan- 
etary satellite, like Jupiter's moons. Limited within the 
more familiar sphere of our solar region, we, however, enjoy 
this advantage, that with the exception of what refers to the 
signification of the surface-appearance or gaseous envelopes 
of the revolving cosmical bodies, the simple or divided tails 
of comets, the ring of the zodiacal light, or the mysterious ap- 
pearance of meteoric asteroids, almost all the results of ob- 
servation admit of being referred to numerical relations, as 
the deductions of strictly-tested presuppositions. It does not, 
however, belong to the sketch of a physical description of the 
universe to test the accuracy of such presuppositions, its prov- 
ince being simply to give a methodical arrangement of numer- 
ical results. They constitute the important heritage whicli, 
ever augmenting, is bequeathed by one century to another. 
A table, comprising the numerical elements of the planets 
(that is to say, their mean distances from the Sun, sidereal 
periods of revolution, the eccentricity of their orbits, their in- 
clination toward the ecliptic, their diameter, mass, and dens- 
ity), would now embrace within very narrow limits the rec- 
ord of the great intellectual conquests of the present age. Let 
us for a moment transport ourselves in imagination to the 
times of the ancients, and fancy Philolaiis the Pythagorean, 
the instructor of Plato, Aristarchus of Samos, or Hipparchus, 
in possession of such a numerical table, or of a graphic rep- 

• On the appearance of new stars, and their subsequent disappear 
ance, see p. 151-164. 



THE SOLAR REGION. 57 

resentation of the orbits of the planets, such as is given in 
our most epitomized manuals, there is scarcely any thing to 
which we could compare the admiration and surprise of these 
men — the heroes of the early and limited knowledge of that 
age — excepting, perhaps, that which might have been expe- 
rienced by Eratosthenes, Strabo, and Claudius Ptolemy, could 
they have seen one of our maps of the world, on Mercator's 
projection, not above a few inches in length and breadth. 

The return of comets in closed elliptical orbits, as a conse- 
quence of the attractive force of the central body, indicates 
the limits of the solar region. As, however, we are as yet 
ignorant whether comets may not some day appear in which 
the major axis may prove to be larger than any that have as 
yet been observed and calculated, these bodies must be re- 
garded as indicating, in their aphelia, merely the limits to 
which the solar regions must at least extend. Hence we may 
characterize the solar system by the visible arM measurable 
results of peculiar operating central forces, and by the cos- 
mical bodies (planets and comets) which rotate round the Sun 
in closed orbits, and are intimately connected with it. The 
considerations which at present engage our attention do not 
embrace a notice of the attraction which the Sun may exert 
on other suns (or fixed stars) lying beyond the limits of these 
reappearing cosmical bodies. 

According to the state of our knowledge at the close of 
this half of the nineteenth century, the solar region includes 
the following bodies, arranging the planets according to theii 
respective distances from the central body : 

22 Principal Planets (Mercury, Venus, the Earth, 
Mars ; Flora, Victoria, Vesta, Iris, Metis, Hebe, Parthen- 
ope, Irene, Astrcea, Egeria, Juno, Ceres, Pallas, Hygiea , 
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune) ; 

21 Satellites (1 belonging to the Earth, 4 to Jupiter, 
8 to Saturn, 6 to Uranus, 2 to Neptune) ; 

197 Comets, whose orbits have been calculated. Of 
these, 6 are interior ; i.e., such as have their aphelia in- 
closed within the outermost of the planetary orbits, viz., that 
of Neptune : we may very probably add to these 

The Rino of the Zodiacal Light, which probably 
lies between the orbits of Venus and Mars ; and likewise, 
according to the opinion of numerous observers, 

The Swarms of the Meteor.-Asteroids which more 
especially intersect the Earth's orbit at certain points 
C 2 



58 COSMOS. 

In the enumeration of the 22 principal p anets, of which 
6 only were known before the 13th of March, 1781, the 14 
small planets, which are sometimes termed co-planets or as- 
teroids, and describe intersecting orbits between Mars and 
Jupiter, have been distinguished from the 8 larger 2^lci'nets 
by the use of smaller type. 

The following occurrences constitute main epochs in the 
more recent history of planetary discoveries. The discovery 
cf Uranus, as the first planet beyond Saturn's orbit, by Will- 
iam Herschel, at Bath, on the 13th of March 1781, who rec- 
ognized it by its motion and disk-like form ; the discovery of 
Ceres — the first observed of the smaller planets — on the 1st 
of January, 1801, by Piazzi, at Palermo ; the recognition of 
the first interior comet, by Encke, at Gotha, in August, 1819, 
and the prediction of the existence of Neptune by Leverrier, 
at Paris, in August, 1846, by the calculation of planetary dis- 
turbances, sM well as the discovery of Neptune by Galle, at 
Berlin, on the 23d of September, 1846. These important 
discoveries have not only tended directly to extend and en- 
rich our knowledge of the solar system, but have further led 
to numerous other discoveries of a similar nature ; as, for in- 
stance, to the knowledge of five other interior comets (of Bi- 
ela, Faye, De Vico, -Brorsen, and D'Arrest, between 1826 and 
1851), and of thirteen small planets, three of which, Pallas, 
Juno, and Vesta, were discovered from 1801 to 1807, and aft- 
er an interval of fully thirty-eight years, since Hencke's for- 
tunate and preconceived discovery of Astrsea, on the 8th of 
December, 1845, the nine others were discovered, in rapid suc- 
cession, by Hencke, Hind, Graham, and De Gasparis, from 
1845 to the middle of 1851. The attention of observers has 
of late been so extensively directed to the cometary world, that 
the orbits of thirty-three newly-discovered comets have been 
calculated during the last eleven years ; hence, nearly as 
many as had oeen determined during the previous forty yearg 
of this century . 



THE SUN. 59 



THE SUN CONSIDERED AS THE CENTRAL BODY. 

The lantern of the world {lucerna Mundi), as Copernicub 
names the Sun,=^ enthroned in the center, is, according to 
Theon of Smyrna, the all- vivifying, pulsating heart of the 
Universe ;t the primary source of light and of radiating heat, 
and the generator of numerous terrestrial, electro-magnetic 
processes, and, indeed, of the greater part of the organic vital 
activity upon our planet, more especially that of the vegetable 
kingdom. In considering the expression of solar force in its 
widest generality, we find that it gives rise to alterations on 
the surface of the Earth — partly by gravitative attraction — 
as in the ebb and flow of the ocean (if we except the share 
taken in the phenomenon by lunar attraction) — partly by light 
and heat-generating transverse vibrations of ether, as in the 
fructifying admixture of the aerial and aqueous envelopes of 
our planet, from the contact of the atmosphere with the vap- 
orizing fluid element in seas, lakes, and rivers. The solar 
action operates, moreover, by differences of heat, in exciting 
atmospheric and oceanic currents, the latter of which have 
continued for thousands of years (though in an inconsiderable 
degree) to accumulate or wash away alluvial strata, and thus 
change the surface of the inundated land ; it operates in the 
generation and maintenance of the electro-magnetic activity 
of the Earth's crust, and that of the oxygen contained in the 
atmosphere ; at one time calling forth calm and gentle forces 
of chemical attraction, and variously determining organic life 
in the endosmoee of cell-walls and in the tissue of muscular 
and nervous fibres ; at another time evoking light-processes 
in the atmosphere, such as the colored coruscations of the polar 
light, the thunder and lightning, hurricanes, and water-spouts. 

Our object in endeavoring to compress in one picture the 

* I have already, :n an earlier part of this work (vol. ii., p. 308, and 
note *), given the passage imitated from the Somnium Scipionis, in ch. 
X. of the first book De Revolut. 

t "The Sun is the heart of the Universe." — Theonis Smymcei, Pla- 
tonici Liber de Astronomia, ed. H. Martin, 1849, p. 182, 298: t^? e/z^'u- 
XtciQ fiiaov TO nepi tov tjIlov, olovel Kapdcav ovra tov Travrdf , bdev (pepov- 
civ avTov Kul TTiv 'ipvxvv dp^afiivTjv 6ia Travrof ^kecv tov au/xuTOc tstc- 
uevTjv and tuv nepuTuv. (This new edition is worthy of notice, since it 
completes the peripatetic views of Adrastus, and many of the Platonic 
dogmas of Dercyllides.) ' 



60 COSMOS. 

influences of solar action, in as far as they are independent 
of the orbit and the position of the axis of our globe, has been 
clearly to demonstrate, by an exposition of the connection ex- 
isting between great, and, at first sight, heterogeneous phe- 
nomena, how physical nature may be depicted in the History 
of the Cosmos as a whole, moved and animated by internal 
and frequently self-adjusting forces. But the waves of light 
not only exert a decomposing and recombining action on the 
corporeal world — they not or iy call forth the tender germs of 
plants from the earth, generate the green coloring matter 
(chlorophyll) within the leaf, and give color to the fragrant 
blossom — they not only produce myriads of reflected images 
of the Sun in the graceful play of the waves, as in the moving 
grass of the field, but the rays of celestial light, in the varied 
gradations of their intensity and duration, are also mysteri- 
ously connected with the inner life of man, his intellectual 
susceptibilities, and the melancholy or cheerful tone of his 
feelings. " Cccli tristitiam discutit Sol et humani 7iubila 
animi serenat^ (Phn., Hist. Nat., ii., 6.) 

In the description of each of the cosmical bodies, I shall 
precede whatever consideration of their physical constitution 
may (except in the case of the Earth) be necessary by their 
respective numerical data. The numerical arrangement of 
these results is nearly identical with that which was adopted 
by Hansen,^ in his admirable Review of the Solar System, 
although I have necessarily made some alterations and addi- 
tions in the data, from the fact that 1 1 planets and 3 satel 
lites have been discovered since 1837, the year in which Han- 
sen wrote. 

The mean distance of the center of the Sun from the Earth 
is, according to Encke's supplementary correction of the 
Sun's parallax {Ahhandlung der Berl. Akad., 1835, p. 309), 
82,728,000 geographical miles, of which 60 go to an equa- 
torial degree, and of which each one, according to Bessel's 
investigation often measurements of degrees {Cosmos, vol. i., 
p. 165), contains exactly 951,807 toises, or 5710-8405 Paris 
feet, or 6086-76 English feet. 

Light requires for its passage from the Sun to the Earth, 
i. e., to traverse the radius of the Earth's orbit, according to 
Struve's observations of aberration, 8' 17"'78 {Cosmos, vol. 
iii., p. 83) ; whence it follows that the Sun's true position ia 
about 20"-445 in alvance of its apparent place. 

• Hansen, in Schumacher's Jahrbuch for 1837, p. 65-141. 



THE sun's spots. 61 

The apparent diameter of the Sun, at its mean distance 
from the Earth, is 32' l"-8, and therefore only 54"' 8 greater 
than the Moon's disk at its mean distance from us. In the 
perihelion, when in winter we are nearest to the Sun, the 
apparent diameter of the latter increases to 32' 34"*6 ; in the 
aphelion, when in summer we are farthest from the Sun, its 
apparent diameter is diminished to 31' 30"' 1. 

The Sun's true diameter is 770,800 geographical miles, oi 
more than 112 times greater than that of the Earth. 

The mass of the Sun is, according to Encke's calculation of 
Sahine's pendulum formula, 359,551 times that of the Earth, 
or 355,499 times that of the Earth and Moon together ( Vierte 
Abhandlung uber den Cometen von Pons in den Schr. der 
Bed. Akad., 1842, p. 5) ; whence the density of the Sun is 
only about one fourth (or, more accurately, 0-252) that of the 
Earth. 

The volume of the Sun is 600 times greater, and its mass 
(according to Galle) 738 times greater than that of all the 
planets combined. It may assist the mind in conceiving a 
sensuous image of the magnitude of the Sun, if we remem- 
ber that if the solar sphere were entirely hollowed out, and 
the Earth placed in its center, there would still be room 
enough for the Moon to describe its orbit, even if the radius 
of the latter were increased 160,000 geographical miles. 

The Sun rotates on its axis in 25^ days. The equator in- 
clines about 7° 30' toward the ecliptic. According to Lau- 
gier's very careful observations {Comptes Rendus de V Acad, 
des Sciences, tom. xv., 1842, p. 941), the period of rotation 
is 25yW days (or 25d. 8h. 9m.), and the inclination of the- 
equator 7° 9'. 

The conjectures gradually adopted in modern astronomy re- 
garding the physical character of the Sun's surface are based 
on long and careful observations of the alterations which take 
place in the self-luminous disk. The order of succession, and 
the connection of these alterations (the formation of the Sun- 
spots, the relation of the deep black nuclei to the surround- 
ing ash-gray penumbras), have led to the assumption that the 
body of the Sun itself is almost entirely dark, but surrounded 
at a considerable distance by a luminous envelope ; that fun- 
nel-shaped openings are formed in this en&gt; elope, in conse- 
quence of the passage of currents from below upward, and 
that the black nucleus of the spot is a portion of the dark 
body of the Sun which is visible through the opening. In oi 
der to render this explanation, of which we here only briefly 



62 COSMOS. 

give the most general features, sufficiently applicable to the 
Aotails of the phenomena upon the surface of the Sun, science 
at present assumes the existence of three envelopes round the 
dark solar sphere ; viz., one interior cloud-like va'poroits en- 
velope, next a luminous investment (photosphere), and above 
these, as appears to have been especially shown by the solar 
echpse of the 8th of July, 1842, an external cloudy envelope ^ 
which is either dark or slightly luminous.* 

As felicitous presentiments and sports of fancy — such sub- 
sequently realized speculations as abound in Grecian antiqui- 
ty — sometimes contain the germ of correct views long prior 
to any actual observation, so we find in the writings of Car- 
dinal Nicolaus de Cusa (in the second book De docta Igno- 
rantid), which belong to the middle of the fifteenth century, 
the clearly expressed opinion that the body of the Sun itself 
is only " an earth-like nucleus, surrounded by a circle of light 
as by a delicate envelope ; that in the center (between the 
dark nucleus and the luminous covering?) there is a mixture 
of water-charged clouds and clear air, similar to our atmos- 

* "D'apres I'etat actuel de nos connaissances astronomiques le Soleil 
Be compose, 1. d'un globe central £l peu pres obscur; 2. d'une immense 
couche de nuages qui est suspendue k une certaine distance de ce globe 
etl'enveloppe de toutes parts ; 3. d'une photosphere ; en d'autres termes, 
d'une sphere resplendissante qui enveloppe la couche nuageuse, comme 
celle-ci, k son tour, enveloppe le noyau obscur. L'eclipse totale du 8 
Juillet, 1842, nous a mis sur la trace d'une troisieme enveloppe, situee 
au-dessus de la photosphere et formee de nuages obscurs ou faiblement 
lumineux. Ce sent les nuages Ae la troisieme enveloppe solaire, situes 
en apparence, pendant l'eclipse totale, sur le contour de I'astre ou un 
peu en dehors, qui ont donne lieu k ces singulieres preeminences rou- 
ge^tres qui en 1842 ont si vivement excite I'altention du monde savant." 
"According to the present condition of our astronomical knowledge, 
the Sun is composed, 1st. of a central sphere which is nearly dark ; 2d. 
of a vast stratum of clouds, suspended at a certain distance from the 
central body, which it surrounds on all sides; 3d. of a photosphere, or, 
in other words, a luminous sphere inclosing the cloudy stratum, which 
in its turn envelops the dark nucleus. The total eclipse of the 8th of 
July, 1842, afforded indications of a third envelope, situated above the 
photosphere, and formed of dark or faintly illumined clouds. These 
clouds of the third solar envelope, apparently situated during the total 
eclipse on the margin ol' the Sun, or even a little beyond it, gave rise 
to those singular, rose-c( lored protuberances, which so powerfully ex- 
cited the attention of the scientific world in 1842." — Arago, in the An- 
nuaire du Bureau des Longitudes pour Van 1846, p. 464, 471. Sir John 
Herschel, in his Outlines of Astronomy, p. 234, § 395 (edition of 1849), 
thus expresses himself: "Above the luminous surface of the Sun, and 
the region in which the spots reside, there are strong indications of the 
existence of a gaseous atmosphere, having a somewhat imperfect trans- 
parency." 



THE sun's spots. 63 

phere ; and that the power of radiating light to vivify the 
vegetation of our Earth does not appertain to the earthy nu- 
cleus of the Sun's body, but to the luminous covering by which 
it is enveloped." This view of the physical condition of the 
Sun's body, which has hitherto been but little regarded in the 
history of astronomy, presents considerable similarity with the 
opinions maintained in the present day.=^ 

* I would, in the first place, give in the original the passages to which 
I refer in the text, and to which my attention was directed by a learned 
work of Clemens. {Giordano Bruno nndNicoIaus von Ctt«ar,1847,$101.) 
Cardinal Nicolaus de Cusa (whose family name was KhrypfFs, i. e., Crab) 
was born at Cues, on the Moselle. He thus writes in the twelfth chap- 
ter of the second book of the Treatise De docta Ignorantia (Nicolai de 
Cusa Opera, ed. Basil, 1565, p. 39), a work that was much esteemed 
at that age : " Neque color nigrediuis est argumentum vilitatis Terrae ; 
nam in Sole si quis esset, non appareret ilia claritas qure nobis : consid 
erato enim corpore Solis, tunc habet quandam quasi terram centrali- 
oi-em, et quandam luciditatem quasi ignilem circumferentialem, et in 
medio quasi aqueam nubem et a^rem clariorem, quemadmodum terra 
ista sua elementa." " Blackness of color is no proof of the inferiority 
of the Earth's substance ; for to an inhabitant of the Sun, if such there 
be, the same brilliancy of appearance would not be presented as to us: 
if we consider the Sun's body, we shall conclude that it consists of a 
certain earthy substance in the center, surrounded by a luminous mat- 
ter, partaking, perhaps, of the nature of fire, and in the midst a sort of 
aqueous clouds and brighter atmosphere, resembling the elements of 
which the Earth consists." To this are appended the words Paradoxa 
and Hypni; by the last of which, he probably understands {hvvnvLa) 
certain speculations, vague and bold hypotheses. In the long Treatise, 
Exercitationes ex Sermonibus Cardinalis {Opera, p. 579), I again find 
the following comparison : " Sicut in Sole considerari potest natura cor- 
poralis, et ilia de se non est magnse virtutis" (notwithstanding the at- 
traction of masses or gravitation!) " et non potest virtutem suam aliis 
corporibus communicare, quia non est radiosa ; et alia natura lucida ilia 
anita, ita quod Sol ex unione utriusque naturae habet virtutem quae suf- 
ficit huic sensibili mundo, ad vitam innovandam in vegetabilibus et an- 
iraalibus, in elementis et mineralibus per suam influentiam radiosam. 
Sic de Christo, qui est Sol justitiae . . . ." "As in the Sun may be 
supposed to exist a corporeal nature, which of itself is of no great effi- 
cacy, and can not communicate its virtues to other bodies, because it is 
not radiant, and another nature united with this ; so that the Sun, from 
the union of the two natures, has a virtue which suffices for this sensi- 
ble world, to renew life in vegetables and animals, in elements and 
minerals, by its own radiant influence. So from Christ, the Sun of Jus- 
tice . . . ." Dr. Clemens thinks that all this must be more than a 
mere felicitous presentiment. It appears to him unlikely that Cusa, in 
the expressions " Considerato corpore Solis ;^^ "in Sole considerari po- 
' test . . . ." " could have appealed to experience, without a tolerably 
accurate observation of the Sun's spots, both their darker portions and 
the penumbrae." He also conjectures " that the penetration of the phi- 
losopher may have been in advance of the results of the science of his 
age, and that his views may have been influenced by discoveries which 



o4 COSMOS. 

The spots on the Sun, as I have already shown in the 
Historical Epochs of the Physical Contemplation of the 
Universe,* were not first observed by Gahleo, Scheiner, or 
Harriot, but by John Fabricius of East Friesland, who also 
was the first to describe, in a printed work, the phenomenon 
he had seen. Both this discoverer and Gralileo, as may be 
se3n by his letter to the Principe Cesi (25th of May, 1612), 
were aware that the spots belonged to the body of the Sun 
itself; but ten or twenty years later, Jean Tarde, a canon of 
Sarlat, and a Belgian Jesuit, maintained almost simultane- 
ously that the Sun's spots were the transits of small planets. 
The one named them Sidera Borbonia, the other Sidera 
Austriaca.i Scheiner was the first who employed blue and 

have usually been ascribed to later observers." It is, indeed, not only 
possible, but even highly probable, that in districts w^here the Sun is 
obscured for many months, as on the coast of Peru, during the garua, 
even uncivilized nations may have seen Sun-spots with the naked eye ; 
but no traveler has, as yet, afforded any evidence of such appearances 
having attracted attention, or having been incorporated among the re- 
ligious myths of their system of Sun-worship. The mere observation 
of the rare phenomenon of a Sun-spot, when seen by the naked eye, in 
the low, or faintly obscured, white, red, or perhaps greenish disk of the 
Sun, would scarcely have led even experienced observers to conjecture 
the existence of several envelopes around the dark body of the Sun. 
Had Cardinal de Cusa known any thing of the spots of the Sun, he 
would assuredly not have failed to refer to these macules Solis in the 
many comparisons of physical and spiritual things in which he was too 
much inclined to indulge. We need only recall the excitement and 
bitter contention with which the discovenesof Joh. Fabricius and Gal- 
ileo were received, soon after the invention of the telescope in the 
beginning of the seventeenth century. 1 have already referred {Cos' 
mos, vol. ii., p. 311) to the obscurely expressed astronomical views of 
the cardinal, who died in 1464, and therefore nine years before the 
birth of Copernicus. The remarkable passage, "Jam nobis manifest- 
um est Terram in veritate moveri;" "Now it is evident that the Earth 
really moves," occurs in lib. ii., cap. 12, De docta Ignorantia. Accord 
ing to Cusa, motion pervades every portion of the celestial regions; we 
do not even find a star that does not describe a circle. " Terra non 
potest esse fixa, sed movetur ut aliae stellae;" "The Earth can not be 
fixed, but moves like other stars." The Earth, however, does not re- 
volve round the Sun, but the Earth and the Sun rotate " around the 
ever-changing pole of the universe." Cusa did not, therefore, hold the 
Copernican views, as has been so successfully shown by Dr. Clemens's 
discovery, in the hospital at Cues, of the fragmentary notice written in 
the cardinal's own hand in 1444. * Cosmos, vol. ii., p. 324-326. 

t Borbonia Sidera, id est, planetoe qui Solis luraina circumvolitant 
motu proprio et regulari, false hactenus ab helioscopis maculae Solis 
nuncupati, ex novis observationibus Joannis Tarde, 1620. Austriaca 
Sidera heliocyclica astronomicis hypothesibus illigata opera Caroli Mai- 
apertii Belgae Montensis e Societate Jesu, 1633. The latter work has 
at all events the merit of affording observations of a succession of spots 



THE SUN S SPOTS. 65 

green stained glasses in solar observations, "which had been 
jproposed seventy years earlier by Apian (Bienewitz), in the 
Astronomicum Ccesareum, and had also been long in use 
among Belgian pilots.* The neglect of this precaution con- 
tributed much to Galileo's blindness. 

As far as I am aware, the most definite expression of the 
necessity for assuming the existence of a dark solar sphere, 
surrounded by a photosphere, grounded upon direct observa- 
tion after the discovery of the Sun's spots, is first to be met 
with in the writings of the great Dominique Cassini,t and 
belongs probably to about the year 1671. According to his 
views, the solar disk which we see is " an ocean of light sur- 
rounding the solid and dark nucleus of the Sun ; the violent 
movements (up-wellings) which occur in this luminous en- 
velope enable us from time to time to see the mountain sum- 
mits of the non-luminous body of the Sun. These constitute 
the black nuclei in the center of the Sun's spots." The ash- 
colored penumbrae surrounding these nuclei had not then been 
explained. 

between 1618 and 1626. This period includes the years for which 
Scheiner published his own observations at Rome in his Rosa Ursina. 
The Canon Tarde beUeves those appearances to be the transits of small 
planets, because " Toeil du monde ne peut avoir des ophthalmies," " the 
eye of the universe can not experience ophthalmia." It must justly 
excite surprise that the meritorious observer, Gascoigne (see Cosmos, 
vol. iii., p. 61), should, twenty years after Tarde's notice of the Bor- 
bonic satellites, still have ascribed the Sun's spots to a conjunction of 
numerous planetary bodies revolving round the Sun in close proximity 
to it and in almost intersecting orbits. Several of these bodies, placed, 
as it were, one over another, were supposed to occasion the black shad- 
ows. (Philos. Transact., vol. xxvii., 1710-1712, p. 282-290, from a let- 
ter of William Crabtree, August, 1640.) 

* Arago, Sur les may ens d' Observer les taches Solaires, in the Annu- 
aire pour Van 1842, p. 476-479 ; Delarabre, Hist, de V Astronomic dtt 
Moyen Age, p. 394 ; and his Hist, de V Astronomie Moderne, torn, i., p. 
681. 

t Mimoires pour servir a VHistoire des Sciences, par M. le Comte de 
Cassini, 1810, p. 242 ; Delambre, Hist, de VAstr. Mod., tom. iii., p. 694. 
Although Cassini in 1671, and La Hire in 1700, had declared the Sun's 
body to be dark, otherwise trustworthy and valuable text-books on as- 
tronomy still continue to ascribe the first idea of this hypothesis to the 
meritorious Lalande. Lalande, in the edition of 1792, of his Astronomie, 
torn, iii., $ 3240, as in the first edition of 1764, tom. ii., $ 2515, merely 
adopts the older view of La Hire, according to which " les taches sont 
les eminences de la masse solide et opaque du Soleil, recouverte com- 
munement (en entier) par le fluide igne ;" " the spots are the elevations 
of the solid and op'aque mass of the Sun, covered by an igneous fluid." 
Alexander Wilson, between the years 1769 and 1774, conceived the firwt 
correct view of a funnel-shaped opening in the photosphere. 



i56 COSMOS. 

An ingenious observation, which has subsequently been 
fully confirmed, made by the astronomer, Alexander Wilson 
of Glasgow, of a large solar spot, on the 22d of Novembe, 
1769, led him to an elucidation of the penumbree. "Wilson 
discovered that as a spot mo'\ied toward the Sun's margin, 
the penumbra became gradually more and more narrow on 
the side turned toward the center of the Sun, compared with 
the opposite side. The observer, in 1774, very correctly con- 
cluded,^ from these relations of dimension, that the nucleus 
of the spot (the portion of the dark solar body visible through 
the funnel-shaped excavation in the luminous envelope) was 
situated at a greater depth than the penumbra, and that the 
latter was formed by the shelving lateral walls of the funnel. 
This mode of explanation did not, however, solve the ques- 
tion why the penumbrse were the lightest near the nuclei. 

The Berlin astronomer, Bode, in his work entitled " Thoughts 
on the Nature of the Sun, and the Formation of its Spots" 
( Gedanken iiber die Natur der Sonne iind die Entstehung 
Hirer Flecken), developed very similar views with his usual 
perspicuity, although he was unacquainted with Wilson's ear- 
lier treatise. He, moreover, had the merit of having facili 
tated the explanation of the penumbrae, by assuming, very 
much in accordance with the conjectures of Cardinal Nicolaus 
de Cusa, the existence of another cloudy stratum of vapor be- 
tween the photosphere and the dark solar body. This hy- 
pothesis of two strata leads to the following conclusions : If 
there occur in less frequent cases an opening in the photo- 
sphere alone, and not, at the same time, in the less transpar- 
ent lower vaporous stratmn, which is but faintly illumined by 
the photosphere, it must reflect a very inconsiderable degree 
of light toward the inhabitants of the Earth, and a gray pe- 
numbra will be formed — a mere halo without a nucleus ; but 
when, owing to tumultuous meteorological processes on the 
surface of the Sun, the opening extends simultaneously through 
both the luminous and the cloudy envelopes, a nucleoid spot 
will appear in the ash-gray penumbra, " which will exhibit 

* Alexander Wilson, Observations on the Solar Spots, writes as fol- 
lows in the Philos. Transact., vol. Ixiv., 1774, part i., p. 6-13, tab. i. : 
" I found that the umbra, which before was equally broad all round the 
nucleus, appeared much contracted on that part which lay toward the 
center of the dish, while the other parts of it remained nearly of the 
former dimensions. I perceived that the shady zone or umbra, which 
surrounded the nucleus, might be nothing else but the shelving sides 
of the luminous matter of the Sun." Compare also Arago, in the Annu- 
aire for 1842, p. 506. 



THE SUN S SPOTS. 67 

more or less hlackness, according as the opening occurs op- 
posite to a sandy, rocky, or aqueous portion of the surface of 
the Sun's disk.*= The halo surrounding the nucleus is fur- 
ther a portion of the outer surface of the vaporous stratum ; 
and as this is less opened than the photosphere, owing to tht 
funnel-shaped form of the whole excavation, the direction of 
the passage of the rays of light, impinging on both sides on 
the margins of the interrupted envelope, and reaching the 
eyes of the observer, occasions the difference, first noticed by 
Wilson, in the breadth of the opposite sides of the penumbra, 
which appears after the nucleoid spot has moved away from 
the center of the Sun's disk. If, as Laugier has frequently 
remarked, the penumbra passes over the black nucleus, caus- 
ing it wholly to disappear, this obscuration must depend on 
the closing of the opening — not of the photosphere, but of the 
vaporous stratum below it. 

A solar spot, which was visible to the naked eye in the year 
1779, fortunately directed William Herschel's superior pow- 
ers of observation and induction to the subj ect which we have 
been considering. We possess the results of his great work, 
which treats of the minutest particulars of the question in a 
very definite manner, and in a nomenclature established by 
himself. His observations appeared in the Philosophical 
Transactions for 1795 and for 1801. As usual, this great 
observer pursued his own course independently of others, re- 
ferring only in one instance to Alexander Wilson. In their 
general character, his views may be regarded as identical 
with those of Bode, and he bases the visibility and dimensions 
of the nucleus and the penumbra (Philos. Transact., 1801, 
p. 270, 318, tab. xviii., fig. 2) on the assumption of an open- 
ing in two envelopes, while he assumes the existence of a 
clear and transparent aerial atmosphere (p. 302) between the 
vaporous envelope and the dark body of the Sun, in which 
clouds that are either wholly dark, or only faintly illumined 
by reflection, are suspended at a height of about 280 to 320 
geographical miles. William Herschel seems, in fact, also 
disposed to regard the photosphere as a mere stratum of 
unconnected phosphorescent clouds of very unequal surface. 
According to his view, " an elastic fluid of unknown nature 
rises from the crust or surface of the dark solar body, gener- 
ating only small luminous pores in the higher regions Avhere 
the action is weak, and large openings, with nuclei, sur- 

* Bode, in the Beschdftigungen der Berlyiischen Gesellschaft NcUur* 
forschender Fi-eunde,hd. ii., 1776, p. 237-241, 249. 



68 COSMOS. A 

rounded by shallows or penumbrse, where the action is more 
tumultuous." 

The black spots, which are seldom round, almost always 
angularly hroken, and characterized by entering angles, are 
frequently surrounded by halos or penumbrse, which exhibit 
the same figure on a larger scale. There is no appearance 
of a transition of the color of the spot into the penumbra, or 
of the latter, which is sometimes filamentous, into that of the 
photosphere. Capocci and Pastorff" (of Buchholz, in Bran- 
denburg) — most diligent observers — have both given very 
accurate representations of the angular form of the nuclei. 
(Schum., Astr. Nachr., No. 115, p. 316 ; No. 133, p. 291 ; 
No. 144, p. 471.) William Herschel and Schwabe saw the 
nucleoid spots divided by bright veins or luminous bridges — 
phenomena of a cloud-like nature generated within the second 
stratum where the penumbrsB originate. These singular con- 
figurations, which probably owe their origin to ascending cur- 
rents, the tumultuous formation of spots, solar faculae, furrows, 
and projecting stripes {crests of luminous waves), indicate, 
according to Sir William Herschel, an intense evolution of 
light ; while, on the other hand, according to the same great 
authority, " the absence of solar spots find their concomitant 
phenomena seems to indicate a low degree of combustion, and, 
consequently, a less beneficial action on the temperature of 
our planet, and the development of vegetation." These con- 
jectures led Sir William Herschel to institute a series of com- 
parisons between the prices of corn and the complaints of poor 
crops,^ and the absence of solar spots, between the years 1676 
and 1684 (according to Flamstead), from 1686 to 1688 (ac- 
cording to Dominique Cassini), from 1695 to 1700, and from 
1795 to 1800. Unfortunately, however, we can never attain 
a knowledge of the numerical elements on which to found 
even a conjectural solution of such a problem ; not only, as 
this circumspect astronomer has himself observed, because the 
price of corn in one part of Europe can not be taken as a cri- 
terion of the state of vegetation over the whole Continent, but 
more especially because a diminution of the mean annual 
temperature, even if it affected the whole of Europe, would 
afford no evidence that the Earth had derived a smaller 
quantity of solar heat throughout that year. It appears from 
Dove's investigations of the irregular variations of tempera- 
ture, that extremes of meteorological conditions always lie 

* WiUiam Herschel, iudthe Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society for 1801, part ii., p. 310-316. 



1«£; SUN S SPOTS. G9 

laterally hy one another, i. e., in almost equal degrees of lat- 
itude. Our own continent, and the temperate parts of North 
America, generally present such contrasts of temperature. 
When our winters are severe, the season there is mild, and 
conversely. These compensations in the local distribution of 
heat, when associated with vicinity to the ocean, are attend- 
ed by the most beneficial results to mankind, owing to the 
indubitable influence exercised by the mean quantity of sum- 
mer heat on the development of vegetation, and consequently 
on the ripening of the cereals. 

While William Herschel attributed an increase of heat on 
the Earth to the activity of the central body — a process from 
which result spots on the Sun — Batista Baliani, almost two 
and a half centuries earlier, in a letter to Galileo, described 
solar spots as cooling agents.* .This opinion coincides with 
the experiment made by the zealous astronomer Gautierf at 
Geneva, in comparing four periods characterized by numer- 
ous and by few spots on the Sun's disk (from 1827 to 1843), 
with the mean temperatures presented by thirty- three Euro- 
pean and twenty-nine American stations of similar latitude. 
This comparison proves, by positive and negative differences, 
the contrasts exhibited by opposite Atlantic coasts. The final 
results, however, scarcely give 0*76° Fahr. as the cooling 
force ascribed to the Sun's spots, and this might with equal 
propriety be attributed to errors of observation and the direc- 
tion of the winds at the localities indicated. 

It still remains for us to notice the third envelope of the 
Sun, to which we have already referred. This is the most 
external of the three, inclosing the photosphere, is cloudy, and 
of imperfect transparency. The remarkable phenomena of 

• We find a reference in the historical fragments of the elder Cato to 
an oflBcial notice of the high price of corn, and an obscuration of the 
"Sun's disk, which continued for many months. The '' luminis caligo'^ 
and " defectus Solis^^ of Roman authors does not invariably indicate an 
echpse of the Sun; as, for instance, in the account of the long-continued 
diminution of the Sun's light after the death of Caesar. Thus, for in- 
stance, we read in Aulus Gellius, Noct. Att., ii., 28, " Verba Catonis in 
Originum quarto haec sunt: non libet scribere, quod in tabula apad 
Pontificem maximum est, quotiens anona cara, quotiens Luna? an Soils 
lumini caligo, aut quid obstiterit." " The words of Cato in the fourth 
book of his Origines are these : I may not write what is frequently en- 
tered in the tables of the priests, that corn was dear whenever there 
was any decrease in the light of the Sun and Moon, or when any thing 
obscured them." 

t Gautier. Reckerches relatives a V Influence que le nombre des tacket 
SoLaires exerce sur les temperatures Terrestres, in the Bibliotkique Uni' 
verselle dc Gentve, Nouv. Serie, torn, li., 1844, p. 327-335. 



70 COSMOS. 

red, mountain, or flame-like elevations, which, if not seen for 
the first time, were at all events more distinctly visible during 
the eclipse of the Sun of the 8th of July, 1842, when they 
were simultaneously noticed by several of the most experi- 
enced observers, have led astronomers to assume the existence 
of a third envelope of this kind, Arago, in a treatise devoted 
to the subject,^ has with much ingenuity tested the several 
observations, and enumerated the grounds which necessitated 
the adoption of this view. He has at the same time shown 
that since 1706 similar red marginal protuberances have been 
eight times described on the occasion of total or annular so- 
lar eclipses. t On the 8th of July, 1842, when the apparently 
larger disk of the Moon entirely covered the Sun, the Moon's 
disk was observed to be surrounded not only by a whitish 
light, $ encircling it like a crown or luminous wreath, but two 
or three protuberances were also seen, as if originating at its 
margin, and were compared by some observers to red jagged 
mountains, by others to reddened masses of ice, and again by 
others to fixed indented red flames. Arago, Laugier, and 
Mauvais at Perpignan, Petit at Montpelier, Airy on the Su- 
perga, Schumacher at Vienna, and numerous other astrono- 
mers, agreed perfectly in the main features of the final re- 
sults, notwithstanding the great difierences in the instruments 
they employed. The elevations did not always appear simul- 
taneously ; in some places they were even seen by the naked 
eye. The estimates of the angles of altitude certainly differ- 
ed ; the most reliable is probably that of Petit, the directoi 
of the Observatory at Toulouse. He fixed it at 1' 45", which, 
if these phenomena were true sun-mountains, would give an 
elevation of 40,000 geographical miles ; that is to say, nearly 
seven times the Earth's diameter, which is only 112th part 
of the diameter of the Sun. The consideration of these phe- 
nomena has led to the very probable hypothesis that these 
red figures are emanations within the third envelope — masses 
of clouds which illumine and color the photosphere. § Ara- 

* Arago, in the Annuaire for 1846, p. 271-438. 

t Id., Ibid., p. 440-447. 

X This is the white appearance which was also observed in the solar 
eclipse of the 15th of May, 1836, and which the great astronomer of 
Konigsberg very correctly described at the time by observing " that 
although the Moon's disk entirely covered the Sun, a luminous corona 
still encircled it, which was a portion of the Sun's atmosphere." (Bes- 
Bel, in Schum., Astr. Nachr., No. 320.) 

$ " Si nous examinions de plus pres I'explication d'apres laquelle lea 
protuberances rougeitres seraient assimilees k des nuages (de la troi- 
Bieme enveloppe), nous ne trouvcrious aucun principe de physique qui 



THE SUN*S SPOTS. 71 

go, in putting forward this hypothesis, expresses the conjec- 
ture that the intense blue color of the sky, which I have my- 
self measured upon the loftiest part of the Cordilleras, though 
with instruments which are certainly " still very imperfect, 
may afford a convenient opportunity for frequently observing 
these mountain-like clouds in the outermost atmosphere of 
the Sun.^ 

When we consider the zone in which solar spots are most 
commonly observed (it is only on the 8th of June and the 9th 
of December, that the spots describe straight lines on the Sun's 
disk, which at the same time are parallel with one another 
and the Sun's equator, and not concave or convex), we are 
struck by the fact that they have rarely been seen in the 

nous empechdt d'admettre que des masses nuageuses de 25,000 k 
30,000 lieues de long flottent dans I'atmosphere du Soleil; que ces 
masses, comme certains nuages de I'atmosphere terrestre, ont des con- 
tours arretes, qu'elles afFectent, qa. et lei, des formes tres tourmentees, 
m^me des forms en surplomb ; que la lumiere solaire (la photosphere) 
les colore en rouge. Si cette troisieme enveloppe existe, elle donnera 
peut-etre la clef de quelques-unes des grandes et deplorables anomalies 
que Ton remarque dans le cours des saisons." "On examining more 
closely the grounds on which these rose-colored protuberances are com- 
pared to clouds (of the third atmosphere), we do not find any principle 
in physics which would oppose the assumption that masses of clouds 
extending from 25,000 to 30,000 leagues, float in the Sun's atmosphere ; 
that these masses, like some clouds in our terrestrial atmosphere, as- 
sume contours exhibiting here and there much-involved forms, appear- 
ing sometimes even sloping or inverted, as it were ; and that they are 
colored red by the light of the Sun (the photosphere). If this third 
atmosphere actually exist, it may, perhaps, tend to solve some of those 
vast and deplorable anomalies which we observe in the course of the 
seasons." — Arago, in the Annuaire for 1846, p. 460, 467. 

* " Tout ce qui afFaiblira sensiblement I'intensite eclairante de la 
portion de I'atmosphdre terrestre qui parait entourer et toucher le con- 
tour circulaire du Soleil, pourra contribuer k rendre les preeminences 
rouge&amp;tres visibles. II est done permis d'esperer qu'un astronome ex- 
erce, etabli au sommet d'une tres haute montagne, pourrait y observer 
regulierement les nuages de la troisieme enveloppe solaire, situes, en ap- 
parence, sur le contour de I'astre ou un pen en dihors, determiner ce 
qu'ils ont de permanent et de variable, noter les periodes de disparition 

et de reapparition " Whatever will perceptibly diminish the 

briUiant intensity of that portion of the terrestrial atmosphere which 
appears to inclose and touch the circumference of the Sun, may con 
tribute to render the rose-colored protuberances visible. We may 
therefore, hope that an experienced astronomer may succeed, on the 
summit of some high mountain, ia making systematic and regular ob 
servations of the clouds of the third solar envelope, whicn appear to ba 
situated on the margin of the Sun, or a little beyond it, and thus determ 
ine the permanence or variability of their character, and note th 
epochs of their disappearance and reappearance . . . ." — Arago, Ibid, 
p. 471 



72 COSMOS. 

equatorial region l&gt;etween 3^ north and 3° south latitude, 
and that they do not occur at all in the polar regions. They 
are, on the whole, most frequent in the region between 11*^ 
and 15° north of the equator, and generally of more common 
occurrence in the northern hemisphere) or, as Sommering 
maintains, may be seen there at a greater distance from the 
equatorial regions than in the southern hemisphere. [Out- 
lines, § 393 ; Observations at the Cape, p. 433.) Galileo 
even estimated the extreme limits of northern and southern 
heliocentric latitude at 29°. Sir John Herschel extends them 
to 35°, as has also been done by Schwabe. (Schum. Astr. 
Nachr., No. 473.) Laugier found some spots as high as 41° 
(Comptes Kendus, tom. xv., p. 944), and Schwabe even in 
50°. The spot observed by La Hire in 70° north latitude, 
must be regarded as a very rare phenomenon. 

This distribution of spots on the Sun's disk, their rarity 
under the equator and in the polar regions, and their paral- 
lel position in reference to the equator, led Sir John Herschel 
to the conjecture that the obstructions which the third vapor- 
ous external atmosphere may present at some points to the 
liberation of heat, generates currents in the Sun's atmosphere 
from the poles toward the equator similar to those which upon 
the Earth occasion the trade- winds and calms near the equa- 
tor, owing to differences of velocity in each of the parallel 
zones. Some spots are of so permanent a character that they 
have continued to appear for fully six months, as was the case 
with the large spot visible in 1779. Schwabe was enabled 
to follow the same group eight times in the year 1840. A 
black nucleoid spot, deUneated in Sir John Herschel's Ob- 
servations at the Cape (to which I have made such constant 
reference), was found, by accurate measurement, to be so large, 
that supposing the whole of our Earth to be propelled through 
the opening of the photosphere, there would still have re- 
mained a free space on either side of more than 920 geograph- 
ical miles. Sommering directs attention to the fact that there 
are certain meridian belts on the Sun's disk in which he had 
never observed a solar spot for many years together. ( TJiilo. 
de Soils maculis a Sa^mmeringio observatis, 1828, p. 22.) 
The great differences presented in the data given for the pe- 
riod of revolution of the Sun are not, by any means, to be as- 
cribed solely to want of accuracy in the observations ; thoy 
depend upon the property exhibited by some spots, of chang- 
ing their position on the disk. Laugier has devoted special 
attention to this subject, and has observed spots which would 



THE sun's spots. • 73 

give separate rotations of 24d. 28m. and 26d. 46m. Our 
knowledge of the actual period of the rotation of the Sun can 
therefore only be regarded as the mean of a large number of 
observations of those maculae, which, from their permanence 
of form, and invariability of position in reference to other co- 
existent spots, may form the basis of reliable observations 

Although solar maculae may be more frequently seen by the 
naked eye than is generally supposed, if the Sun's disk be at- 
tentively observed, there yet occur not more than two or three 
notices of this phenomenon between the beginning of the ninth 
and of the seventeenth centuries, on the accuracy of which we 
can rely. Among these I would reckon the supposed reten- 
tion of Mercury within the Sun's disk for eight days, m the 
year 807, as recorded in the annals of the Frankish kings, 
first ascribed to an astronomer of the Benedictine order, and 
subsequently to Eginhard ; the 91-days transit of Venus over 
the Sun, under the Calif Al-Motassem, in the year 840 ; and 
the Signa in Sole of the year 1096, as noticed in the Stain- 
delii Chronicon. I have, during several years, made the 
epochs of the mysterious obscurations of the Sun which have 
been recorded in history — or, to use a more correct expression, 
the periods of the more or less prolonged diminution of bright 
daylight — the subject of special investigation, both in a mete- 
orological and a cosmical point of view.*= Since large num- 

* Although it can not be doubted that individual Greeks and Romans 
may have seen large Sun-spots with the naked eye, it is at all events 
certain that such observations have never been referred to in any of the 
works of Greek and Roman authors that have come down to us. The 
passages of Theophrastus, De Signis, iv., 1, p. 7^7 ; of Aratus, Diosem., 
v., 90-92 ; and of Proclus, Paraphr., 11, 14, in which the younger Ideler 
{Meteorol. Veterum,p. 201, and in the Commentary to Aristotle, Meteor., 
torn, i., p. 374) thought he could discover references to the Sun's spots, 
merely imply that the Sun's disk, which indicates fine weather, exhib- 
its no difference on its surface, nothing remarkable (fxrjde ti a^fia ^ipoi), 
but, on the contrary, perfect uniformity. The aiifia, the dappled sur- 
face, is expressly ascribed to light clouds, the atmosphere (the scholiast 
of Aratus says, to the thickness of the air) ; hence we always hear of 
the morning and evening Sun, because their disk, independently of all 
Sun-spots, are supposed, even in the present day, according to an old 
belief, not wholly unworthy of regard, to give notice to the farmer and 
the mariner, as diapho,nomeiera, of coming changes of weather. The 
Sun's disk, on the horizon, gives an indication of the condition of the 
lower atmospheric strata which are nearer the Earth. The first of the 
Sun-spots noticed in the text as visible to the naked eye, and falsely re- 
garded in the years 807 and 840 as transits of Mercury and Venus, is 
recorded in the great historical collection of Justus Reuberus, Veterta 
Scriptores (1726), in the section Annales Regum Francarum Piptni, 
Karoli Magni et Ludovici, a quodavi ejus eelatis Astronomo, Ludovici re- 

Vol. IV.— D 




III if^'iT T 1 riiigi 

idniitoMMnMHiiiMitaiMitatflMataii^ 




mmmm^t^immmimmtmmi^mmsmm 








«5" 




^■■■hC^ 



■Pl«i 



- wtf -,. 





16 COSMOS. 

obscurations during which stars were partly visible, as in to« 
tal solar eclipses. 

626 A.D. According also to Abu'l-Farag. {Hist. Dynast., p. 94, 99), 
half of the Sun's disk continued obscured for ei^ht months. 

733 A.D. One year after the Arabs had been driven back across the 
Pyrenees after the battle of Tours, the Sun was so much darkened 
on the ]9tb of August as to excite universal terror. — Schnurrer, 
Chron., theil i., p. 164. 

807 A.D. A Sun-spot was observed, which was believed to be the 
planet Mercury. — Reuber, Vet. Script., p. 58 (see p. 70). 

840 A.D. From the 28th of May to the 26th of August (Assemani 
singularly euougii gives the date of May, 839), the so-called transit 
of Venus across the Sun's disk was observed. (See above, p. 73- 
74.) The Calif Al-Motassem reigned from 834 to 841, when he was 
succeeded by Harun-el-Vatek, the ninth Calif. 

934 A.D. In the valuable work Historia de Portugal, by Faria y 
Souza, 1730, p. 147, I find the following passage: " En Portugal se 
vio sin luz la tierra por dos meses. Avia el Sol perdido su splendor." 
The Earth was without light for two months in 'Portugal, for the 
Sun had lost its brightness. The heavens were then opened in fis- 
sures " por fractura," by strong flashes of lightning, when there was 
suddenly bright sun-light. 

1091 A.D. On the 21st of September, the Sun was darkened for three 
hours, and when the obscuration had ceased, the Sun's disk still re 
tained a peculiar color. "" Fuit eclipsis Solis, 11 Kal. Octob. fere tres 
horas : Sol circa meridiem dire nigrescebat." — Martin Crusius, An- 
nales Suevici, Francof., 1595, torn, i., p. 279 ; Schnurrer, th. i., p. 219, 

1096 A.D. Sun-spots were seen by the naked eye on the 3d of March. 
'' Signum in Sole apparuit V., Nono Marcii feria secunda incipientis 
quadragesimae. Joh. Staindelii, Presbyteri Pataviensis, Chronicon 
Generate, in Oefelii Rerum Boicarum Scriptores, tom. i., 1763, p. 485. 

1206 A.D. On the last day of February there was, according to Joa- 
quin de Villalba (Epidemiologia Espanola, Madr., 1803, tom. i., p. 
30), complete darkness for six hours, turning the day into night. 
This phenomenon was succeeded by long-continued and abundant 
rains. " El dia ultimo del mes de Febrero hubo un eclipse de Sol 
que dur6 seis horas con tanto obscuridad como si fuera media noche. 
Siguieron k este fenomeno abundantes y contiuuas Uuvias." A very 
similar phenomenon is recorded for June, 1191, by Schnurrer, th. i., 
p. 258, 265. 

1241 A.D. Five months after the Mongolian battle at Liegnitz, the 
Sun was darkened (in some places?), and such darkness caused that 
the stars could be seen in the heavens at three o'clock on Michael- 
mas day. " Obscuratus est Sol (in quibusdam locis?), et factae sunt 
tenebrai, ita ut stella? viderentur in ccelo, circa festum S. Michaelis 
hora nona." — Chronicon Claustro-Neoburgense (of the Monastery of 
Neuberg, at Vienna : this chronicle comprises the annals of the pe- 
riod from the year 218 A.D. to 1348) ; Pez, Scriptores Rerum Avs- 
triacarum. Lips., 1721, tom. i., p. 458. 

1547 A.D. The 23d, 24th, and 25th of April, consequently the days 
preceding and immediately succeeding the battle of Mtlhlbach, in 
which the Elector John Frederick was taken prisoner. Kepler says 
in Paralipom. ad Vitellium, quihus Astronomice pars Optica traditur, 
16P4, p. 259, " The elder and younger Gemma record that in the year 



THE SUN S SPOTS. 77 

f 

As, according to Du Sejour's calculation, the longest possi- 
ble duration of a total eclipse of the Sun can not be more than 
7m. 58s. at the equator, nor more than 6m. 10s. for the lati- 
tude of Paris, the decrease of daylight which is recorded by 
the annalists may, on account of its duration for many hours, 
possibly be referred to one or other of the three following and 
very different causes : 1 . A disturbance in the process of the 
evolution of light, as it were a diminution of intensity in the 
photosphere ; 2. Obstructions (such as a greater and denser 
formation of clouds) in the outermost opaque vaporous en- 
velope investing the photosphere, by which the radiation of 
solar light and heat is impeded ; 3. The impure condition of 
our atmosphere, arising, for instance, from the obscuring (most- 
ly organic) meteoric dust, rain, or sand-rain, such as is de- 
scribed by Macgowan to have continued for several days to- 
gether in China. The second and third of these causes do 
not require the occurrence of a diminution of the electro-mag- 
netic light process, perhaps (of the perpetual polar light=^), in 
the solar atmosphere, but the last-named cause excludes the 
visibility of stars at noon, of which such frequent mention is 
made in these mysterious and vaguely-described obscurations. 

Arago's discovery of chromatic polarization has not only 
confirmed the existence of the third and outermost envelope 

1547, before the battle between Charles V. and the Duke of Saxony, 
the Sun appeared for three days as if it were suSused by blood, while 
at the same time many stars were visible at noon." " Refert Gemma^ 
pater et filius, anno 1547, ante conflictum Caroli V. cum Saxoniai 
Duce, Solem per tres dies ceu sanguine perfusum comparuisse, ut 
etiam stellce plereque in meridie conspicerentur." Kepler (in Stella 
Nova in Serpentario, p. 113) further expresses his uncertainty as to 
the cause of the phenomenon ; he asks whether the diminution of the 
Sun's light be owing to some celestial causes: *' Soils lumen ob cau- 

sas quasdam sublimes hebetari " whether it be owing to the 

•\vide diffusion of some cometary substance, " materia cometica latins 
sparsa," for the cause can not have originated in our atmosphere, 
since the stars were visible at noon. Schnurrer ( Chronik der Seu- 
chen, th. ii., p. 93) thinks, notwithstanding the visibility of the stars, 
that the phenomenon must have been the same as the so-called 
" HShenrauch," for Charles V. complained before the battle " that 
the Sun was always obscured when he was about to engage with the 
enemy." " Semper se nebula? densitate infestari, quoties sibi cum 
hoste pugnandum sit." (Lambert, Hortens. de bello German., lib 
vi., p. 182.) 

* Horrebow (Basis Astronomies, 1735, $ 226) makes use of the same 
expression. Solar light, according to him, is "a perpetual Northern 
light ioithin the Sun's atmosphere, produced by the agency of powerful 
magnetic forces^ (See Hanow, in Joh. Dan. Titius's OemoinnHtzig^ 
Abhandlungen iiber naturliche Dinge, 1768, p. 102.) 



78 COSMOS. 

of the Sun, but has likewise added considerable weight to the 
conjectures advanced in reference to the whole physical con- 
stitution of the central body of our planetary system. " A 
ray of light which reaches our eyes, after traversing many 
millions of miles, from the remotest regions of heaven, an- 
nounces, as it were of itself, in the polariscope, whether it is 
reflected or refracted, whether it emanates from a solid, or 
fluid, or gaseous body, it announces even the degree of its in- 
tensity. {Cosmos, vol. i., p. 52, and vol. ii., p. 332.) It is 
essential to distinguish between natural light, as it emanates 
directly from the Sun, the fixed stars, or flames of gas, and is 
polarized by reflection from a glass plate at an angle of 35° 
25', and that polarized light which is radiated as such from 
certain substances (as ignited bodies, whether of a solid or 
liquid nature). The polarized light which emanates from 
the above-named class of bodies very probably proceeds from 
their interior. As the light thus emanates from a denser body 
into the surrounding attenuated atmospheric strata, it is re- 
fracted on the surface, and in this process a part of the re- 
fracted ray is reflected back to the interior, and is converted 
by reflection into polarized light, while the other portion ex- 
hibits the properties of light polarized by refraction. The 
chromatic polariscope distinguishes the two by the opposite 
position of the colored complementary images. Arago has 
shown, by careful experiments extending beyond the year 
1820, that an ignited solid body (for instance, a red-hot iron 
ball), or a luminous, fused metal, yield only ordinary light, in 
rays issuing in a perpendicular direction, while the rays which 
reach our eyes from the margins, under very small angles, are 
polarized. When this optical instrument, by which the two 
kinds of light could be distinguished, was applied to gas flames, 
there was no indication of polarization, however small were 
the angles at which the rays emanated. If even the light be 
generated in the interior of gaseous bodies, the length of way 
does not appear to lessen the number and intensity of the very 
oblique rays in their passage through the rare media of the 
gas, nor does their emergence at the surface and their transi- 
tion into a different medium cause polarization by refraction. 
Now, since the Sun does not either exhibit any trace of polar- 
ization when the hght is suffered to reach the polariscope in 
a very oblique direction, and at small angles from the margin, 
it follows from this important comparison that the light shin- 
ing in the Sun can not emanate from the solid solar body, nor 
from any liquid substance, but must be derived from a gase* 



THE SUN S SPOTS. 79 

(ms, self-luminous envelope. We thus possess a material phys- 
ical analysis of the photosphere. 

The same instrument has, however, also led to the conclu- 
sion that the intensity of the light of the Sun is not greater 
in the center of the disk than at its margins. When the 
two complementary colored images of the Sun — the red and 
blue — are so arranged that the margin of the one image falls 
on the center of the other, perfect white will be produced. 
If the intensity of the light were not the same in the different 
parts of the Sun's disk — if, for example, the center were more 
luminous than the margin, then the partial covering of the 
images in the common segments of the blue and red disk 
would not exhibit a pure white, but a pale red, because the 
blue rays would only be able to neutralize a portion of the 
more numerous red rays. If, moreover, we remember that 
in the gaseous photosphere of the Sun, in opposition to that 
which occurs in solid or liquid bodies, the smallness of the 
angle at which the rays of light emanate does not cause their 
number to diminish at the margins, and as the same angle 
of vision embraces a larger number of luminous points at the 
margins than in the center of the disk, we could not here 
reckon upon that compensation which, were the Sun a lu- 
minous iron globe, and consequently a solid body, would take 
place between the opposite effects of the smallness of the an- 
gle of radiation and the comprehension of a larger number 
of luminous points at the same visual angle. The self-lumin- 
ous gaseous envelope, i. e., the solar disk visible to us, must 
therefore (in opposition to the indications of the polariscope, 
which shows the margin and the center to be of equal intens- 
ity) appear more luminous in the center than at the margin. 
The cause of this discrepancy has been ascribed to the outer- 
most and less transparent vaporous envelope surrounding the 
photosphere, which diminishes the light from the center less 
than that of the marginal rays on its long passage through 
the vaporous envelope. =^ Bouguer, Laplace, Airy, and Sir 

* Arago, in the Mimoires des Sciences MatMm. et Phys. de i Institut 
de France, annee 1811, partie i., p. 118; Matthieu, in Delambre, Hist, 
de VAstr. au dix-huitieme siecle, p. 351, 652 ; Fourrier, Eloge de William 
Herschel, in the Mim. de V Institut, torn, vi., annee 1823 (Par., 1827), 
p. Ixxii. It is alike remarkable and corroborative of the great uniform- 
ity of character in the light of the Sun, whether emanating from its cen- 
ter or its margins, that, according to an ingenious experiment made by 
Forbes, during a solar eclipse in 1836, a spectrum formed from the cir- 
cumferential rays alone was identical both in reference to the number 
amd position of the dark lines or stripes intersecting it. with the spec- 



80 ' COSMOS. 

John Herschel, are all opposed to these views of my friend, 
and consider the intensity of the light weaker at the margin 

trum arising from the entire solar light. When, therefore, rays of cer&gt; 
tain refrangibility are wanting in solar light, they have probably not 
passed into the Sun's atmosphere, as Sir David Brewster conjectures, 
since the circumferential rays produce the same dark lines when they 
shine through a much thicker medium. — Forbes, in the Comptes Rendus, 
torn, ii., 1836, p. 576. I will append to this note all the facts that I col 
lected in the year 1847, from Arago's MSS. : 

'* Des phenomenes de la polarisation color6e donnent la certitude que 
lo bord du Soleil a la meme intensite de lumiere que le centre ; car en 
pla9ant dans la polariscope un segment du bord sur un segment du cen 
tre, j'obtiens (comme efi'et complemenlaire du rouge et du bleu) un 
blanc pur. Dans un corps solide (dans une boule de fer chauffee au 
rouge) le meme angle de vision embrasse une plus grande etendue au 
bord qu'au centre, selon la proportion du cosinus de I'angle : mais dans 
la meme proportion aussi, le plus grand nombre de points materiels 
emettent une lumiere plus faible, en raison de leur obliquiti. Le rap- 
port de I'angle est naturellement le meme pour une sphere gazeuse, 
mais I'obli quite ne produisant pas dans les gazes le meme eflfet de dimi- 
nution que dans les corps solides, le bord de la sphere gazeuse serait 
plus lumineux que le centre. Ce que nous appelons le disque lumi- 
ueux du Soleil, est la photosphere gazeuse, comme je I'ai prouve par le 
manque absolu de traces de polarisation sur le bord du disque. Pour 
expliquer done VigaliU dHntensiU du bord et du centre indiquee par 
le polariscope, il faut admettre une enveloppe exterieure, qui diminue 
(eteint) moins la lumiere qui vient du centre que les rayons qui vien- 
iient sur le long trajet du bord k I'oeil. Cette enveloppe exterieure 
forme le couronne blanchatre dans les eclipses totales du Soleil. La 
lumiere qui emane des corps solides et liquides incandescens, est par- 
tiellement polarisee quand les rayons observes forment, avec la surface 
de sortie, un angle d'un petit nombre de degres ; mais il n'y a aucune 
trace sensible de polarisation lorsqu'on regarde de la m6me maniere 
dans le polariscope des gazes enflammes. Cette experience demontre 
que la lumiere solaire ne sort pas d'une masse solide ou liquide incan- 
descente. La lumiere ne s'engendre pas uuiquement k la surface des 
corps; une portion nalt dans leur substance meme, cette substance fAt- 
elle du platine. Ce n'est done pas la decomposition de I'oxygene am- 
biant qui donne la lumiere. L'emission de lumiere polarisee par le fer 
liquide est un effet de refraction au passage vers un moyen d'une moindre 
densite. Partout ou il y a refraction, il y a production d'un peu de lu- 
miere polarisee. Les gazes n'en donnent pas, parceque leurs couches 
n'ont pas assez de densite. La Lune, suivie pendant le cours d'une lu- 
naison entiere, ofFre des effets de polarisation, excepte k I'epoque de la 
pleine Lune et des jours qui en approchent beaucoup. La lumiere sol- 
aire trouve, surtout dans les premiers et derniers quartiers, k la surface, 
in6gale (montagneuse) de notre satellite, des inclinaisons, de plans con- 
venables pour produire la polarisation par reflexion." 

'' The phenomena of chromatic polarization afford evidence that the 
margin of the Sun has the same intensity of light as the center ; for by 
placing in the polariscope a segment of the margin upon a-central seg- 
ment, I obtain a pure white as the complementary effect of red and 
blue. In a solid body (as in an iron ball heated red-hot), the same 
visual angle embraces a larger extent of the margin than of the center 



THE sun's spots. 81 

than in the center. The last named of these distinguished 
physicists and astronomers expresses himself as follows, in 
reference to this question.* " Now, granting the existence 
of such an atmosphere, its form, in obedience to the laws of 
equilibrium, must be that of an oblate spheroid, the elliptic- 
ities of whose strata differ from each other and from that of 
the nucleus. Consequently, the equatorial portions of this 

according to the ratio of the cosine of the angle ; but in the same ratio^ 
the greater number of the material points emit a feebler light, in con' 
sequence of their obliquity. The ratio of the angles is naturally the same 
for a gaseous sphere ; but since the obliquity does not produce the same 
amount of diminution in gases as in solid bodies, the margin of the gas- 
eous sphere would be more luminous than its center. That which we 
term the luminous disk of the Sun is the gaseous photosphere, as I have 
proved by the entire absence of every trace of polarization on the mar- 
gin of the disk. To explain the eqtiality of intensity indicated by the 
polariscope for the margin and the center, we must admit the existence 
of an outer envelope, which diminishes (extinguishes) less of the light 
which comes from the center than from the marginal rays having a 
longer way to traverse before they reach the eye. This outer envel- 
ope forms the whitish corona of light observed in total eclipses of the 
Sun. The light which emanates from solid and liquid incandescent 
bodies is partially polarized when' the rays observed form an angle of 
a few degrees with the surface from whence they emerge ; but there 
is no sensible evidence of polarization when incandescent gases are 
seen in the polariscope. This experiment proves, therefore, that solar 
light does not emanate from a solid mass or an incandescent liquid. 
Light is not engendered solely on the surface of bodies ; but a portion 
originates within the substance itself, even when the experiment is 
made with platinum. Light, therefore, is not produced by the decom- 
position of the ambient oxygen. The emission of polarized light from 
liquid iron is an effect of refraction during its passage toward a medium 
of lesser density. Wherever there is refraction, a small amount of po- 
larized light must be produced : gases do not emit polarized light, be- 
cause their strata do not possess the requisite amount of density. When 
the Moon is followed through all its phases, it will be found to afford 
evidences of polarization, excepting at the full moon, and the days im- 
mediately preceding and following it. It is more especially during 
the first and last quarters that the unequal (mountainous) surface of 
our satellite presents suitable inclinations for the polarization of solar 
light by reflection." 

* Sir John Herschel, Astron. Observ. made at the Cape of Good Hope, 
$ 425, p. 434; Outlines of Astr., $ 395, p. '234. Compare Fizeau and 
Foucault, in the Comptes Rendus de V Acad, des Sciences, t. xviii., 1844, 
p. 860. It is remarkable enough that Giordano Bruno, who was burned 
eight years before the invention of the telescope, and eleven years be- 
fore the discovery of the spots of the Sun, should have believed in the 
rotation of the Sun upon its axis. He considered, on the other hand, 
that the center of the Sun was less luminous than the edges. Owing 
to an optical deception, he believed that he saw the disk turn round, 
and the whirling edges expand and contract. (Jordauo Bruno, par 
Christian Bartholmess, tom. ii., 1847, p. 367.) 

D 2 



82 COSMOS. 

envelope must be of a thickness difierent from that of the 
polar, density for density, so that a difierent obstacle must 
be thereby opposed to the escape of heat from the equatorial 
and the polar regions of the Sun." Arago is engaged at the 
present moment in a series of experiments, by which he pur- 
poses to test not only his own views, but also to reduce the 
results of observation to accurate numerical relations. 

A comparison between solar light and the two most intense 
kinds of artificial light which man has hitherto been able to 
produce, yields, according to the present imperfect condition 
of photometry, the following numerical results : Fizeau and 
Foucault found, by their ingenious experiments, that Drum- 
mond's light (produced by the flame of the oxyhydrogen lamp 
directed against a surface of chalk) was to the light of the 
Sun's disk as 1 to 146. The luminous current, which in Da- 
vy's experiment was generated between two charcoal points 
by means of a Bunsen's battery, having forty-six small plates, 
was to the light of the Sun as 1 to 4*2 ; but when very large 
plates were used, the ratio was as 1 to 2 5, and this light was, 
therefore, not quite three times less intense than solar light.* 
When we consider the surprise still experienced at the cir- 
cumstance of Drummond's dazzling light forming a black spot 
when projected on the Sun's disk, we are doubly struck by the 
felicity with which Galileo, by a series of conclusions as early 
as 1612,t on the smallness of the distance from the Sun at 
which the disk of Venus was no longer visible to the naked 
eye, arrived at the result that the blackest nucleus of the 
Sun's spots was more luminous than the brightest portions 
of the full Moon. 

William Herschel, assuming the intensity of the whole 
light of the Sun at 1000, estimated the average light of the 
penumbrae at 469, and the black nuclei at 7. According to 
this estimate, which is certainly very conjectural, a black nu- 
cleus would yet possess 2000 times more light than the full 

* Fizeau and Foucault, RecJierch.es sur VIntensiti de la Lumiere imise 
par le Charbon dans V Experience de Davy, in the Comptes Rendus, torn. 
xviii., 1844, p. 753. " The most intensely ignited solid (ignited quick- 
lime in Lieutenant Drummond's oxyhydrogen lamp) appear only as 
black spots on the disk of the Sun when held between it and the eye." 
—Outlines, p. 36 (Cosmos, vol. ii., p. 325-326). 

t Compare Arago's commentary on Galileo's letter to Marcus Welser, 
as well as his optical explanation of the influence of the diffuse reflected 
solar light of the atmospheric strata which covers the object seen in the 
sky upon the field of a telescope, as it were, with a luminous vail,m the 
Annuaire du Bureau des Long, for 1842, p. 482-487. 



SOLAR LIGHT. 83 

Moon, since the latter, according to Bouguer, is 300,000 less 
bright than the Sun. The degree of illumination of the nu- 
clei visible to us, i, e., of the dark body of the Sun illumined 
by reflection from the walls of the opened photosphere, the 
interior atmosphere from which the penumhrse are generated, 
and by the light of the strata of our terrestrial atmosphere 
through which we see it, has been strikingly manifested on 
the occasion of several transits of Mercury. When compared 
with the planet, whose dark side was turned toward us, tho 
near and darkest nuclei presented a light brownish-gray ap- 
pearance. *" The admirable observer, Counselor Schwabe, of 
Dessau, was particularly struck by this difference of blackness 
between the planet and the nuclei, in the transit of Mercury 
on the 5th of May, 1832. On the occasion of my observing 
the transit of this planet in Peru, on the 9th of November, 
1802, in consequence of being engaged in measuring the dis- 
tances from the threads, I was unfortunately unable to make 
any comparison between the different intensities of the light, 
although Mercury's disk almost touched the nearest dark 
spot. Professor Henry, of Princeton, North America, had al- 
ready shown, by his experiments in 1815, that the Sun's spots 
radiate a perceptibly less heat than those portions on which 
there were no spots. The images of the Sun and of a large 
spot were projected on a screen, and the differences of heat 
measured by means of a thermo-electrical apparatus.! 

Whether rays of heat differ from rays of light by a differ- 
ence in the lengths of the transversal vibrations of ether, or 
whether they are identical with rays of light, but that a cer- 
tain velocity in the vibrations which generates very high tem- 
peratures is requisite to excite the impression of light in our 
organs, the Sun, as the main source of light and heat, must 
nevertheless be able to call forth and animate magnetic forces 
on our planet, and more especially in the gaseous strata of 
our atmosphere. The early knowledge of thermo-electrical 
phenomena in crystallized bodies (such as tourmaline, bora- 
cite, and topaz), and Oersted's great discovery (1820) that 
every conducting body charged with electricity exerts a defin- 
ite action on the magnetic needle during the continuation of 
the electrical current, afforded practical evidence of the cor- 
relation of heat, electricity, and magnetism. Basing his de- 
ductions on the idea of such an affinity, Ampere, who ascribed 

* Madler, Astr., p. 81. 

t Philos. Mag., ser. iii., vol. xxviii., p. 230 ; and Poggend., Afmalen, 
bd. Ixviii., p. 101. 



84 COSMOS. 

all magnetism to electrical currents which lie in a plane at 
right angles to the axes of the magnet, advanced the in- 
genious hypothesis that terrestrial magnetism (the magnetic 
charge of the Earth) was generated by electrical currents, 
circulating round the planet from east to west ; and that the 
horar}' variations of the magnetic declination are on this ac- 
count consequences of the fluctuations of heat, varying with 
the position of the Sun, by whose action these currents are 
excited. These views of Ampere have been confirmed by 
Seebeck's thermo-magnetic experiments, in which differences 
of temperature of the points of contact of a circle composed 
of bismuth and copper, or other heterogeneous metals, affect 
the magnetic needle. 

Another recent and brilliant discovery of Faraday's, the 
notice of which has been of almost simultaneous occurrence 
with the printing of these pages, throws an unexpected light 
on the same important subject. While the earlier researches 
of this great physicist showed that all gases are diamagnetic, 
i. e., assume a direction from east to west, as bismuth and 
phosphorus, but that this property is most feebly exhibited in 
oxygen, it has been shown by his latest researches, which 
were begun in 1847, that oxygen alone, of all gases, like iron, 
assumes a position from north to south, and that oxygen gas 
loses a portion of its paramagnetic force by expansion and by 
elevation of the temperature. Since the diamagnetic activity 
of the other constituents of the atmosphere, such as the nitro- 
gen and carbonic acid, are not modified by expansion or by 
an elevation of temperature, it only remains for us to consid- 
er the oxygen, " which surrounds the whole Earth, as it were, 
like a large sphere of sheet tin, and receives magnetism from 
it." The half of this sphere which is turned toward the Sun 
is less paramagnetic than the opposite half ; and as the bound- 
aries of these halves are constantly altered by their rotation 
and revolution round the Sun, Faraday is inclined to refer a 
portion of the variations of terrestrial magnetism on the 
Earth's surface to these thermic relations. The assimilation 
thus shown by experiment to exist between a single gas (oxy- 
gen) and iron, is an important discovery of our ow,i age,* 
which derives additional value from the fact that oxygen 
probably constitutes the half of all the ponderable matters 

* Faraday upon atmospheric magnetism, in the Exper. Researcket 
on Electricity, series xxv. and xxvi. (Philos. Trantact. for 1851, part i.)^ 
§ 2774, 2780, 2881, 2892, 2968, and for the history of the investigation, 
$ 2847. . 



THE SUN S SPOTS. 85 

ihat occur in accessible portions of our Earth. Without as- 
suming magnetic poles in the Sun's body, or any special mag- 
netic forces in the solar rays, the central body may, as a pow- 
erful source of heat, excite magnetic activity on our planet. 

The attempts that have been made to prove, by means of 
meteorological observations prosecuted ibr many years at m- 
dividual spots, that one side of the Sun (for instance, the side 
which was turned toward the Earth on the 1st of January, 
1846) possesses a more intsnse heating power than the oppo- 
site one,* have not led to more reliable results than the older 
Greenwich observations of Maskeleyne, which were supposed 
to prove that the Sun had decreased in diameter. 

The observations made by Counselor Schwabe, of Dessau, 
for reducing the periodicity of the Sun's spots to definite nu- 
merical relations, appear to have a surer foundation. No as- 
tronomer of the present day, however admirable may have 
been his instruments, could have devoted his attention more 
continuously to this subject than Schwabe, who, during the 
long period of twenty-four years, frequently examined the 
Sun's disk upward of 300 days in the year. As his observa- 
tions of the Sun's spots from 1844 to 1850 have not yet been 
published, I have presumed so far on our friendship as to re- 
quest that he would communicate them to me, and at the 
same time answer a number of questions which I proposed 
to him. I will close this section of the Physical Constitu- 
tion of our Central Body with the observations with which 
this observer has allowed me to enrich the astronomical por- 
tion of my work. 

" The numbers contained in the following table leave no 
doubt that, at least from the year 1826 to 1850, the occur- 
rence of spots has been so far characterized by periods of ten 
years, that its maxima have fallen in the years 1828, 1837, 
and 1848, and its minima in the years 1833 and 1843. I 
have had no opportunity," says Schwabe, " of acquainting 
myself with the older observations in a continued series, but 
I willingly concur in the opinion that this period may itself 
be further characterized by variability. "f 

* Compare Nerviinder of Helsingfors, in the Bulletin de la Ctasse 
Physico-MatMm. de V Acad, de St. Pitersbourg, torn, iii., 1845, p. 30-32 ; 
and Buys-Ballot, of Utrecht, in Poggend., Annalen der Physik, vol 
Ixviii., 1846, p. 205-213. 

t I have distinguished by inverted commas the quotations from 
Schwabe's manuscript communications from p. 85-87. Only the ob 
servations of the years 1826 to 1843 have already been published in 
Schumacher's Astron. Nachr., No. 495 (bd. xxi., 1844), p. 235". 



fi6 



COSMOS. 



Year. 


Groups. 


Days shov/ing 
no Spots. 


Days of Ob- 
servation. 


1826 


118 


22 


277 


1827 


161 


2 


273 


1828 


225 





282 


1829 


199 





244 


1830 


190 


1 


217 


1831 


149 


3 


239 


1832 


84 


49 


270 


1833 


33 


139 


267 


1834 


51 


120 


273 


1835 


173 


18 


244 


1836 


272 





200 


1837 


333 





168 


1838 


282 





202 


1839 


162 





205 


1840 


152 


3 


263 


1841 


102 


15 


283 


1842 


68 


64 


307 


1843 


34 


149 


312 


1844 


52 


111 


321 


1845 


114 


29 


332 


1846 


157 


1 


314 


1847 


257 





276 


1848 


330 





278 


1849 


238 





285 


1850 


186 


2 


308 



" I observed large spots visible to the naked eye in almost 
%11 the years not characterized by the minimum ; the largest 
appeared in 1828, 1829, 1831, 1836, 1837, 1838, 1839, 1847, 
1848. I regard all spots whose diameter exceeds 50" as 
large, and it is only when of such a size that they begin to 
be visible to even the keenest unaided sight. 

" The spots are undoubtedly closely connected with the 
formation of faculee, for I have often observed faculaB or shal- 
lows formed at the same points from whence the spots had 
disappeared, while new solar spots were also developed with- 
in the faculge. Every spot is surrounded with a more or less 
bright luminous cloud. I do not think that the spots exert 
any influence on the annual temperature. I register the 
height of the barometer and thermometer three times in the 
course of each day, but the annual mean numbers deduced 
from these observations have not hitherto Indicated any ap- 
preciable connection between the temperature and the num- 
ber of the spots. Nor, indeed, would any importance be due 
to the apparent indication of such a connection in individual 
cases, unless the results were found to correspond with others 
derived from many difierent parts of the Earth. If the solar 



THE SUN S SPOTS. S7 

•pots exert any slight miluence on our atmosphere, my tables 
would; perhaps, rathei tend to show that the years which 
exhibit a larger number of spots had a smaller number of 
fine days than those exhibiting few spots." (Schum., Astron. 
Nachr., No. 638, h 221.) 

"William Herschel named the brighter streaks of light 
which are seen only toward the Sun's circumference, /ac«^Z^, 
and the vein-like streaks visible only toward the center of the 
Sun's disk, shallows {Astr. Nachr., No. 350, p. 243). I am 
of opinion that the faculce and shallows are both derived 
from the same conglobate luminous clouds, which appear 
more intensely bright at the circumference, but, being less 
luminous in the center of the Sun's disk than the surface, 
exhibit the appearance of shallows. I think it preferable to 
designate all the brighter portions of the Sun as lu7ninous 
clouds, dividing them, according to their form, into globate 
and vein-like. These luminous clouds are irregularly dis- 
tributed over the Sun, and when more strongly manifested 
occasionally impart a mottled or marbled appearance to the 
disk. This is often distinctly visible over the entire circum- 
ference of the Sun, and sometimes even to its poles, but yet 
always most decidedly manifested in the two proper zones 
of the spots, even when no spots are visible in those regions. 
At such times these bright zones of Sun-spots vividly remind 
one of Jupiter's belts. 

" The fainter portions lying between the vein-like lumin 
ous clouds on vthe general surface of the Sun are deeper in- 
dentations, and always present a shagreen-like gray, sand- 
like appearance, reminding the observer of a mass of uni- 
formly-sized grains of sand. On this shagreen-like surface 
we may occasionally notice exceedingly small faint gray (not 
black) pores, which are further intersected by very delicate 
dark veins. {Astr. Nachr., No. 473, p. 286.) These pores, 
when present in large masses, form gray nebulous groups, 
constituting the penumbrse of the Sun-spots. Here the pores 
and black points may be seen spreading from the nucleus to the 
circumference of the penumbra, generally in a radiating form, 
which occasions the identity of configuration so frequently ob- 
served to exist between the penumbra and the nucleus." 

The signification and connection of these varying phenom- 
ena can never be manifested in their entire importance to 
the inquiring physicist until an uninterrupted series of repie- 
sentations of the Sun's spots* can be obtained by the aid of 
* Sir John Herschel, Observations at the Cape, p. 434. 



88 COSMOS. 

mechanical clock-work and photographic apparatus, as the 
result of prolonged observations during the many months of 
serene weather enjoyed in a tropical climate. The meteor- 
ological processes at work in the gaseous envelopes of the 
dark body of the Sun are the causes which produce the phe- 
nomena termed Sun-spots and conglobate luminous clouds. 
It is probable that there, as in the meteorology of our own 
planet, the disturbances of very multifarious and complicated 
character depend upon such general and local causes, that it 
can only be by means of prolonged observations, character- 
ized by completeness, that we can hope to solve even a por- 
tion of this still obscure problem. 



' II. 

THE PLANETS. 

General comparative considerations of a whole class of 
cosmical bodies must here precede their individual descrip- 
tion. These considerations refer to the 22 principal planets 
and 21 moons [satellites, or secondary planets'] which have 
been discovered up to the present time, not to the planetary 
bodies in general, among which the comets whose orbits have 
been calculated are alone ten-fold more numerous. The 
planets possess, upon the whole, a feeble scintillation, inas- 
much as they shine by the reflected light of the Sun, and 
their planetary light emanates from disks. {Cosmos, vol. iii., 
p. 76.) In the ash-colored light of the Moon, as well as in 
the red light of its obscured disk, which is seen with great in- 
tensity between the tropics, the Sun's light undergoes, in 
reference to the observer upon the Earth, a twice repeated 
change in its direction. Attention has been already directed 
elsewhere* to the fact that the Earth and other planets pos- 
sess in themselves a feeble power of emitting light, as is 
specially proved by some remarkable phenomena upon that 
portion of Venus which is turned away from the Sun. 

We shall consider the planets according to their nimiber, 
the sequence of their discovery, their volumes compared either 
with each other or with their distances from the sun ; ac- 
cording to their relative densities, masses, periods of rotation, 
degrees of eccentricity, the inclinations of their axes, and 
characteristic differences ivithin and beyond the zone of the 

• Co»mo$, vol. i., p. 201, and note p. 202. 



THE PLANETS. &lt;59 

small planets. In the comparative contemplation ol these 
suhjects, it is consistent with the nature of this work to be- 
stow especial attention upon the selection of the numerical 
relations, which, at the period in which these pages appear, 
are considered to be the most accurate, i. e., the results of 
the most recent and reliable investigations. 

a. PRINCIPAL PLANETS. 

] . Number and Epoch of Discovery. — Of the seven cos- 
mical bodies which, firom the most remote antiquity, have 
been distinguished by their constantly varying relative po- 
sition toward each other from those which apparently main- 
tain the same positions and distances — the scintillating stars 
of the region of fixed stars [orbis inerrans] — there are only five 
which appear star-like, " quinque stellce errantes ;" they are 
Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. The Sun and 
the Moon remained almost separated from the others, since 
they form large disks, and also on account of the greater 
importance attached to them in accordance with religious 
myths. ^ Thus, according to Diodorus (ii., 30), the Chaldeans 
were acquainted with only five planets. Plato also says 
distinctly in the Timceus, where he only once mentions the 
planets, " Round the Earth, fixed in the center of the Cosmos, 
move the Moon, the Sun, and jive other stars, which have 
received the name oi planets ; the whole, therefore, in seven 
revolutions."! In the old Pythagorean representation of the 
celestial system, according to Philolaus, the five planets were 
mentioned in a similar manner among the ten deified bod- 
ies which revolve round the central fire (the focus of the 
universe, karia) " immediately beneath the region of fixed 
stars ;"$ these were succeeded by the Sun, Moon, Earth, and 
the avrixOiiiv (the anti-Earth). Even Ptolemy always speaks 
of only five planets. The enumeration of the planets in sys- 
tems of seven, as JuHus Firmicus distributed them among the 
decani,^ as they are represented in the zodiacal circle of Bi- 

* Gesenius, in the Hallischen Litter atur-Zeitung, 1822, Nos. 101 and 
102 (Supplement, p. 801-812). Among the Chaldeans, the Sun aud 
Moon were held to be the two principal deities ; the five planets mere 
iy represented genii. 

t Plato, in the Timceits, p. 38, Steph. ; Davis's translation, ed. Bohn, 
p. 342. 

X B6ckh, De Platonico systemate Caslestmm glolorum et de vera iw 
dole astronomies Philolaicce, p. xvii., and the same in Philolaus, 1819, 
p. 99. 

$ Jul. Fii-micus Maternus, Astr-:n., libri viii. (ed. Pruckner, Basil 
1551), lib. ii., cap. 4, of the time of IJonstantine the Great. 



90 COSMOS. 

anchini (probally of the third century after Christ), exam 
med by myself elsewhere,* and as they are met with in the 
Egyptian monuments of the time of the Csesars, does not be- 
long to the ancient astronomy, but to the subsequent epochs, 
in which astrological chimeras had become universally dif- 
fused.! We must not be surprised that the Moon was in- 
cluded in the series of the seven planets, since, with the ex- 
ception of a memorable theory of attraction put forward by 
Anaxagoras [Cosmos, vol. ii., p. 309, and note), its more 
intimate connection with the Earth was scarcely ever sus- 
pected by the ancients. On the contrary, according to an 
opinion respecting the system of the world which VitruviusJ 
and Martianus Capella§ quote, without stating its originator, 
Mercury and Venus, which we call planets, are represented 
as satellites of the Sun, which itself revolves round the Earth, 

* Humboldt, Monumens des Peuples Indigenes de VAm^rique, vol. ii., 
p. 42-49. I have already directed attention in 1812 to the analogy be« 
tween the zodiac of Bianchini and that of Dendera. Compare Letronne, 
Observations Critiques sur les Reprdscntations Zodiacales, p. 97 ; and 
Lepsius, Chronologie der j^gypter, 1849, p. 80. 

t Letronne, Sur VOrigine du Zodiaque Grec, p. 29. Lepsius, Chro- 
'nol. der ^gypt., p. 83. Letronne opposes the old Chaldean origin of 
the planetary week on account of the number seven. 

X Vitruv., De Archit., ix., 4 (ed. Rode, 1800, p. 209). Neither Vitru- 
vius nor Martianus Capella mention the Egyptians as the originators of 
a system, according to which Mercury and Venus are considered as sliI- 
ellites of the planetary Sun. The former says, " Mercurii autem et Ve- 
neris stellae circum Soils radios, solem ipsum, uti centrum, itineribua 
coronantes, i-egi*essus retrorsum et retardationes faciunt." " But Mer 
cury and Venus, which encircle in their orbits the Sun itself as a center 
retrogress and proceed slowly round its rays." 

§ Martianus Mineus Felix Capella, De Nuptiis Philos. et Mercurii, lib. 
viii. (ed. Grotii, 1599, p. 289) : "For though Venus and Mercury appear 
to rise and set daily, yet their orbits do not, however, go round the 
Earth, but revolve round the Sun in a wider orbit. In fact, the center 
of their orbits is in the Sun, so that they are sometimes above it . . . ." 
"Nam Venus Mercuriusque licet ortus occasusque quotidianos osten- 
dant, tamen eorum circuli Terras omnino non ambiunt, sed circa Solem 
laxiore ambitu circulantur. Denique circulorum suorum centrum in 

Sole constituunt, ita ut supra ipsum aliquando " As this place is 

written over, " Quod Tellus non sit centrum omnibus planetis," " Be- 
cause the Earth is not the center of all the planets," it may certainly, as 
Gassendi asserts, have had an influence upon the first views of Coper- 
nicus, more than the passages attributed to the great geometer, Apol- 
lonius of Perga. However, Copernicus only says, " Minime contem- 
nendum arbitror, quod Martianus Capella scripsit, existimans quod Ve- 
nus et Mercurius circumerrant Solem in medio existentem." " I by no 
means think that we should despise what Martianus Capella has writ- 
ten, who supposes that Venus and Mercury revolve round the Sun, 
which is fixed in the center " Compare Cosmos, vol. ii., p. 312, and 
note. 



THE PLANETS. 91 

There is as little foundation for considering such a system as 
this to be Egyptian,^ as there is for confounding it with the 
Ptolemaic epicycles or the system of Tycho. 

The names by which the star-like planets of the ancients 
were represented are of two kinds : names of deities, and 
ugnificantly descriptive names derived from physical char- 
acters. Which part of them originally belonged to the Chal- 
deans, and which to the Egyptians, is so much the more dif- 
ficult to determine from the sources which have hitherto been 
made use of, as the Greek writers present us, not with the 
original names employed by other nations, but only transla- 
tions of these into Greek equivalents, which were more or 
less modified by the individuality of those writers' opinions. 
What knowledge the Egyptians possessed anterior to the Chal- 
deans, whether these latter are to be considered merely as gift- 
ed disciples of the former,! is a question which infringes upon 
the important but obscure problem of primitive civilization 
of the human race, and the commencement of the develop- 

* Henry Martin, in his Commentary to the Timceus (Etudes sur le 
TimSe de Platon, torn, ii., p. 129-133), appears to me to have explain- 
ed very happily the passage in Macrobius respecting the ratio Ckaldceo 
rum, which led the praiseworthy Ideler into error (in WoltF's and Butt 
mann's Museum der Alterthums- Wissenschaft, bd. ii., s. 443, and in his 
Treatise upon Eudoxus, p. 48). Macrobius (in Somn. Scipionis, lib. i., 
cap. 19 ; lib. ii., cap. 3, ed. 1634, p. 64 and 90) says nothing of the sys- 
tem mentioned by Vitruvius and Martianus Capella, according to which 
Mercury and Venus are satellites of the Sun, which, however, itself re- 
volves with the other planets round the Earth, which is fixed in the 
center. He enumerates only the differences in the succession of the 
orbits of the Sun, Venus, Mercury, and the Moon, according to the 
eiews of Cicero. He says, '• Ciceroni, Archimedes et Chaldseorum ra- 
tio consentit ; Plato iEgyptios secutus est." " Archimedes and the sys- 
tem of the Chaldajans agree; Plato followed that of the Egyptians." 
When Cicero exclaims, in the eloquent description of the whole plan- 
etary system (Somn. Scip., cap. 4, Edmond's translation, ed. Bohn, p. 
294), " Hunc (Solem) ut comites consequuntur Veneris alter, alter Mer- 
curii cursus ;" " The motions of Venus and Mercury follow it (the Sun) 
as companions," he refers only to the proximity of the Sun's orbit and 
those of the two inferior planets, after he had previously enumerated 
the three cursus of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, all revolving round the 
immovable Earth. The orbit of a secondary planet can not surround 
that of a principal planet, and yet Macrobius says distinctly, " ^gyp- 
tiorum ratio talis est : circulus, per quem Sol discurrit, a Mercurii cir- 
culo ut inferior ambitur, ilium quoque superior circulus Veneris inclu- 
dit" "The following is the system of the Egyptians: the circle in 
which the Sun moves is encompassed by the circle of Mercury, which 
m its turn is encircled by the larger one of Venus." The orbits are aU 
permanently parallel to each other mutually surrounding. 

f liCpsius, Chronologie der yEgypter, th. i., p. 207. 



92 COSMOS. 

ment of scientific ideas upon the Nile or the Euphrates. The 
Egyptian names of the 36 Decans are known ; but the Egyp- 
tian names of the planets, with the exception of one or two, 
have not been transmitted to us.^ 

It is remarkable that Plato and Aristotle employed only 
the names of deities for the planets which Diodorus also 
mentions ; while at a later period, for example, in the book 
De Mundo, erroneously attributed to Aristotle, a combina- 
tion of both kinds of names are met with, those of deities, and 
the descriptive (expressive) names : (paCvcjv for Saturn, ariX- 
6g)v for Mercury, rrvpoEig for Mars.f Although the name 

* The name of the planet Mars, mutilated by Vettius Valeus and 
Cedrenus, must, in all probability, correspond to the name Her-tosch, 
as Seb does to Saturn. (Lepsius, Chronol. der ^gypt., p. 90 and 93.) 

t The most striking differences are met with on comparing Aristot., 
Metaph., xii., cap. 8, p. 1073, ed, Bekker, with Pseudo-Aristot., De Mun- 
do, cap. 2, p. 392. The planet names Phaethon, Pyrois, Hercules, Stil- 
bon, and Juno, appear in the latter work, which points to the times of 
Apuleius and the Antonines, in which Chaldean astrology was already 
diffused, over the whole Roman empire, and the terms of different na- 
tions mixed with each other. (Compare Cosmos, vol. ii., p. 29, and 
note). Diodorus Siculus says positively that the Chaldeans first named 
the planets after their Babylonian deities, and that these names were 
thus transferred, to the Greeks. Ideler {Eudoxus, p. 48), on the con- 
traiy, ascribes these names to the Egyptians, and grounds his argument 
upon the old existence on the Nile of a seven-day planetary week\Hand- 
buck der Chronologic, bd. i., p. 180): an hypothesis which Lepsius has 
completely disproved (Ckronologie der u^g., th. i., p. 131). I will 
here collate from Eratosthenes, from the editor of Epinomis (Philippua 
Opuntius?), from Geminius, Pliny, Theon of Smyrna, Cleomedes, Achil- 
les Tatius, Julius Firmicus, and Simplicius, the synonyms of the five 
oldest planets, as they have been transmitted to us ^chiefly through pre- 
dilection for astrology : 

Saturn: cpaivuv, Nemesis, also called a sun by five authors (Theon. 
Smyrna, p. 87 and 105, Martin) ; 

Jupiter: (paeOov, Osiris; 

Mars : nvpostg, Hercules ; 

Venus : iua^opo^, (^uaclibpo^, Lucifer ; ^aTvepog, Vesper ; Juno, Isis ; 

Mercury : arlMuv, Apollo. 
Achilles Tatius {Isag. in Phaen. Arati, cap. 17) considers it strange 
" that the Egyptians, as well as the Greeks, should call the least lumin- 
ous of the planets the shining" (perhaps only because it brought pros- 
perity).^ According to Diodorus, the name refers to the opinion "that 
Saturn was that planet which principally and most clearly foretold the 
future." — Letronne, Sur VOrigine du Zodiaque Grec, p. 33, and in the 
Journal des Savants, 1836, p. 17. Compare also Carteron, Analyse des 
Recherches Zodiacales, p. 97. Names which are transmitted as equiv- 
alents from one people to another, certainly depend in many cases, in 
addition to their oingin, upon accidental circumstances, which can not 
be investigated ; however, it is necessaiy to remark here, that etymo- 
logically, ^alveiv expresses a mere shining, a fainter evolution of light, 



THE PLANETS. 93 

of Sun was strangely enough applied to Saturn, the outer- 
most of the then known planets, as is proved by several pas- 

which is continuous or constant in intensity, while (yTc2.6eiv refers lo an 
intermittent scintillating light of greater brilliancy. The descriptive 
names : ^aivuv for the remote Saturn, gtiMov for the nearer planet 
Mercury, appear the more appropriate, as I have befoi'e pointed out 
(Cosmos, vol. iii. p. 72), from the circumstance that, as seen by day 
in the great refractor of Frauenhofer, Saturn and Jupiter appear feebly 
luminous in comparison with the scintillating Mercury. There is, 
therefore, as Professor Franz remarks, a succession of increasing brill- 
iancy, indicated from Saturn {(paivuv) to Jupiter, from Jupiter {^aeduv) 
to the colored glowing Mars {jTvpoEig), to Venus (^ua&lt;j&gt;6pog), and to Mer 
cury (ariMtjv). 

My acquaintance with the Indian name of Saturn ('sanaistsckara), 
the slowly wandering, induced me to ask my celebrated friend Bopp 
whether, upon the whole, a distinction between names of deities and 
descriptive names was also to be made in the Indian planetary names, 
as in those of the Greeks, and probably the Chaldeans. I here insert 
the opinion, for which I am indebted to this great philologist, arrang- 
ing the planets, however, according to their actual distances from the 
Sun, as in the above table (commencing with the greatest distance), 
not as they stand in Amarakoscha (by Colebrooke, p. 17 and 18). There 
are, in fact, among the five Sanscrit names three descriptive ones : Sat- 
urn, Mars, and Venus. 

" Saturn : 'sanaistschara, from 'sanais, slow, and tschara, going ; also 
'sauri, a name of Vishnu (derived as a patronymic from 'sfira. Grand- 
father of \\.\) and 'sani. The planet name 'sani-vdrafor, ' dies Saturn!,' 
is radically related to the adverb 'sanais, slow. The names of the week- 
days derived from planets appears, however, not to have been known 
to Amarasinha. They are, indeed, of later introduction. 

" Jupiter : Vrihaspati ; or, according to an older Vedic mode of writ- 
ing which Lassen follows, Brihaspati : the Lord of increase, a Vedic 
deity: from vrih (brih), to grow, and pati, lord. 

"Mars: angaraka (from angara, burning coal); also lohitdnga, the 
red body : from lohita, red, and anga, body. 

" Venus: a male planet, which is called suki-a, i. e., the brilliant. An- 
other name of this planet is daitya-guru: Teacher, guru, the Titans, 
Daityas. 

" Mercury : Budha, not to be confounded as a planet name with 
Buddha, the founder of the religious sect; also Rauhineya, the son of 
the nymph Rohinl, wife of the Moon (soma), on which account the plan- 
et is sometimes called saumya, a patronymic of the Sanscrit word mond. 
The etymological root of budha, the planet name, and buddha, the name 
of the saint, is budh, to know. It seems to me improbable that Wuotan 
(Wotan, Odin) are connected with Budha. This conjecture is found- 
ed, indeed, principally upon the external similarity of form, and upon 
the correspondence of the name of the day of the week, * dies Mercu- 
rii,' with the old Saxon Wodanes-dag, and the Indian Budha-vfira, i. e., 
Budha's day. The primitive signification of v6ra is repetition, for ex- 
ample, in bahuv&amp;rdn, many times, often ; it subsequently occurs at the 
end of a compound w^ord with the signification day. Jacob Grimm 
derives the German Wuotan from the verb watan,vuot (the German 
waten), which signifies meare, transmeare, cum impetu ferri, and ortho- 
graphically corresponds to the Li tin vadere. (Deutsche Myihologie, p. 



94 COSMOS. 

sages in the Commentary of Simplicius (p. 122), to the eighth 
book of the De Codo of Aristotle, in Hyginus, Diodorus, and 
Theon of Smyrna, it certainly was only its position, and the 
length of its orbit, which raised it above the other planets. 
The descriptive names, however old and Chaldean they may 
be, were not very frequently employed by the Greek and Ro- 
man writers until the time of the Caesars. Their diffusion 
is connected with the influence of astrology. The planetary 
signs are, with the exception of the disk of the Sun and the 
Moon's crescent upon Egyptian monuments, of very recent 
origin ; according to Letronne's researches, =^ they would not 

120.) Wuotan, Odinn, is, according to Jacob Grimm, the all-powerful, 
all-penetrating being : * qui omnia permeat,' as Lucan says of Jupiter." — 
Compare, with reference to the Indian names of the days of the week 
Budha and Buddha, and the week-days in general, the observations of 
my brother, in his work Ueber die Verbindungen zwischen Java vnd In.' 
dien (Kawi Sprache, bd. i., p. 187-190). 

* Compare Letronne, Sur VAmulette de Jules Cisar et les Signes Plan 
6taires, in the Revue ArcMologiqtie, Ann6e III., 1846, p. 261. Salmasius 
considered the oldest planetary sign for Jupiter to be the initial letter 
of Zevf, that of Mars a contraction of the cognomen -dovpLog. The sun- 
disk was rendered almost unrecognizable by an oblique and triangular 
bundle of rays issuing from it. As the Earth was not included among 
the planets in any of the ancient systems, except, perhaps, the Philo- 
Pythagorean, Letronne considers the planetary sign of the Earth " to 
have come into use after the time of Copernicus." The remarkable 
passage in Olympiodorus, on the consecration of the metals to individ- 
ual planets, is taken from Proclus, and was traced by Boekh (it is in 
p. 14 of the Basil edition, and at p. 30 of Schneider's edition^. — Com 
pare, for Olympiodorus, Aristot., MeteoroL, ed. Ideler, tom. ii., p. 163. 
The scholium to Pindar {Isthm.), in which the metals are compared 
with the planets, also belongs to the new Platonic school. — Lobeck 
( Aglaophamus in OrpTi., tom. ii., p. 936). In accordance with the samo 
connection of ideas, planetary signs by-and-by became signs of the met 
als; indeed, some (as Mercurius, for quicksilver, the argentum vivum 
and hydrargyrus of Pliny) became names of metals. In the valuable 
collection of Greek manuscripts of the Paris Library are two manu- 
scripts on the cabalistic, or so-called sacred art, of which one (No. 2250) 
mentions the metals consecrated to the planets without planetary signs; 
the other, however (No. 2329), which, according to the writing, is of 
the fifteenth century (a kind of chemical dictionary), combines the 
names of the metals with a small number of planetary signs. (H6rer, 
Histoire de la Ckimie, tom. i., p. 250.) In the Paris manuscript No. 
2250, quicksilver is attributed to Mercury, and silver to the Moon, 
while, on the contrary, in No. 2329, quicksilver belongs to the Moon, 
and tin to Jupiter. Olympiodorus has ascribed the latter metal to Mer- 
cury. Thus indefinite were the mystic relations of the cosmical bodies 
to the metaUic powers. 

This is also the appropriate place to mention the planetary hours and 
the planetary days in the small seven-day period (the week), concern* 
ing the antiquity and diffusion of which among i-emote nations more 



THE PLANETS. 95 

date further back than the tenth century. Even upon stones 
with Gnostic inscriptions they are not met with. Subsequent 

correct views have only recently been established. The Egyptians had 
originally no short periods of seven days, but periods ot ten days, simi- 
lar to the week, as has been proved by Lepsius {Chronologic der ^g-, 
p. 132), and as is also testified by monuments which date back to the 
most remote times of the erection of the large pyramids. Three such 
decades formed one of the twelve months of the solar year. On read- 
ing the passage in Dio Cassius (lib. xxxvii., cap. 18), " That the custom 
of naming the days after the seven planets was first adopted by the 
Egyptians, and had, in no very long time, been communicated by them 
to all other nations, especially the Romans, with whom it was then al- 
ready quite familiarized," it must not be forgotten that this writer lived 
in the later period of Alexander Severus, and that, since the first irrup- 
tion of the Oriental astrology under the Caesars, and in consequence of 
the early and extensive commerce of so many races of people in Alex- 
andria, it was the fashion among Western nations to call every thing 
Egyptian which appeared ancient. The seven-day week was undoubt- 
edly the earliest and most diffused among the Semitic nations ; not only 
among the Hebrews, but even among the nomadic Arabians long be- 
fore the time of Mohammed. I have submitted to a learned investiga- 
tor of Semitic antiquities, the Oriental traveler Professor Tischeudorf, 
at Leipsic, the question whether, besides the Sabbath, there occur in 
the Old Testament any names for the individual days of the week (other 
than the second and the third of the achebua) 1 Whether no planetary 
name for any one day of the seven-day period occurred any where in 
the New Testament at a period in which it was certain that the foreign 
inhabitants of Palestine already pursued planetary astrology ? The an- 
swer was, " There is an entire absence, not only in the Old and New 
Testaments, but also in the Mischna and Talmud, of any traces of 
names of week-days taken from the planets. Neither is the expression 
the second or third day of the schebua employed ; and time is general- 
ly reckoned by the days of the month ; the day before the Sabbath is 
also called the sixth day, without any further addition. The word Sab- 
bath was also transferred to the week throughout (Ideler, Handbuch 
der ChronoL, bd. i., p. 780); consequently, the first, second, and third 
day of the Sabbath stand for the days of the week in the Talmud as 
well. The word i68o[j.dq for schebua is not in the New Testament. 
The Talmud, which certainly extends from the second to the third cen- 
tury, has descriptive Hebrew names for a few planets, for the brilliant 
Venus and the red-colored Mars. Among these, the name of Sabbatai 
(literally Sabbath-star) for Saturn is especially remarkable, as among 
the Pharisaic names of the stars which Epiphanius enumerates, the name 
Hochab Sabbath is employed for Saturn." Has not this had an influ- 
ence upon the conversion of Sabbath day into Saturn day, the " Satumi 
sacra dies" of Tibullus {Eleg., i., 3, 18)? Another passage in Tacitus 
extends the range of these relations to Saturn as a planet and as a tra- 
ditional historical personage. (Compare also Ftirst, Kultur- und Litte- 
raturgeschichte der Juden in Asien, 1849, p. 40.) 

The different luminous forms of the Moon certainly attracted the ob- 
servation of hunters and herdsmen earlier than astrological phantasms. 
It may therefore be assumed, with Ideler, that the week has origin- 
ated from the length of the synodic months, the fourth part of which 
jimouQts, on the average, to 7§ days ; that, on the contrary, r *fereuces 



\)G COSMOS. 

transcribers have, however, added them to Gnostic and al- 
chemistic manuscripts ; scarcely, in any case, to the oldest 

to the planetary series (the sequence of their distances from each oth- 
er), together with the planetary hours and days, belongs to an entirely 
different period of advanced and speculative culture. 

With reference to the naming of the individual week-days after plan- 
ets, and the arrangement and succession of the planets — 
Saturn, Venus, 

Jupiter, Mercury, and 

Mars, Moon, 

Sun, 
situated, according to the most ancient and widely-diffused belief (Gem- 
inus. Element. Astr., p. 4; Cicero, Somn. Scip., cap. 4; Firmicus, ii., 4, 
Edmond's translation, ed. Bohn, p, 294-298), between the sphere of 
fixed stars and the immovable earth as a central body, there have been 
three views put forward : one derived from musical intervals ; another 
from the astrological names of the planetary hours ; a third from the 
distribution of each three decans, or three planets, which are the rulers 
{domini) of these decans among the twelve signs of the zodiac. The 
first two hypotheses are met with in the remarkable passage of Dio 
Cassius, in which he endeavors to explain (lib. xxxvii., cap. 17) why 
the Jews, according to their laws, celebrated the day of Saturn (our 
Saturday). " If," says he, " the musical interval which is called 6ia 
Tsaadpuv, the fourth, is applied to the seven planets according to their 
times of revolution, and Saturn, the outermost of all, taken as the start- 
ing-point, the next which occurs is the fourth (the Sun), then the sev- 
enth (the Moon), and in this way the planets are encountered in the 
same order of succession in which their names have been applied to 
the week-days." A commentary upon this passage is given by Vincent, 
Snr les Manuscrits Grecs relative a la Musique, 1847, p. 138. Compare 
also Lobeck, Aglaophamus, in Orph., p. 941-946. The second expla- 
nation of Dio Cassius is borrowed from the periodical series of the plan 
etary hours. " If," he adds, " the hours of the day and the night are 
counted from the first (hour of the day), and this ascribed to Saturn, 
the following to Jupiter, the third to Mars, the fourth to the Sun, the 
fifth to Venus, the sixth to Mercury, the seventh to the Moon, always 
recommencing from the beginning, it will be found, if all the twenty- 
four hours are gone through, that the first hour of the following day 
coincides with the Sun, the first of the third with the Moon; in short, 
the first hour of any one day coincides with the planet after which the 
day is named." In the same way, Paulus Alexandrinus, an astronomic- 
al mathematician of the fourth century, calls the ruler of each week 
day that planet whose name agrees with the first hour of the particular 
day. 

These modes of explaining the names of week-days have hitherto 
been very generally considered as the more correct; but Letronne en- 
tertains a third explanation — the distribution of any three planets over 
B sign of the zodiac — which he considers to be the most adequate, upon 
the evidence of the long-neglected zodiacal circle of Bianchini, pre- 
served in the Louvre, to which I myself directed the attention of ar- 
chfeologists in 1812, on account of the remarkable combination of a 
Greek and Kirgisch-Tartar zodiac. (Letronne, Observ. Crit. et ArchM. 
$ur VOhjet. des Representations ZodiacaUf, 1824, p. 97-99.) This dis 
tribution of pknets among the 36 decaiis of the Dodecatomeria is pre 



THE PLANETS 97 

manuscripts of Greek astronomers ; of Ptolemy, of Theon, or 
of Cleomedes. The earliest planetary signs, some of which 

cisely that which Julius Firmicus Maternus (ii., 4) describes as " sig- 
norum decani eorumque domini." If those planets are separated which 
in each of the signs are the first of the three, the succession of the plan- 
etary days in the week is obtained (Virgo: Sun, Venus, Mercury; 
Libra: Moon, Saturn, Jupiter; Scorpio: Mars, Sun, Venus ; Sagittarius: 

Mercury which may here serve as an example for the first four 

days of the week : Dies Soils, Lunce, Martis, Mercurii). As, according 
to Diodorus, among the Chaldeans, the number of the planets (star- 
like) originally amounted only to five, and not seven, all the here-men- 
tioned combinations in which more than five planets form periodical 
series appear to be not of old Chaldean origin, but much rather to date 
from a subsequent astrological period. (Letronne, Sur VOrigine du 
Zodiaque Grec, 1840, p. 29.) 

With respect to the concordance of the arrangement of the planets 
as days of the week with their arrangement and distribution among 
the decans in the zodiacal circle of Bianchini, a brief explanation will, 
perhaps, be acceptable to some readers. If a letter is assigned to each 
cosmical body in the order of succession adopted in antiquity (Saturn 
a, Jupiter b, Mars c, Sun d, Venus e, Mercury /, Moon g), and with 
these seven members the following periodical series are formed— 

ab cdefg, abed.... 
there is obtained, 1st, by passing over two members of the distribution 
among the decans, each of which comprises three planets (the zodiacal 
sign of the first one giving, in each case, its name to the week-day), the 
new periodical series 

adgefbe, adgc.... 
that is. Dies Saturm, Solis, Lunce, Martis, and so on ; 2dly, the same 
new series, 

adgc.... 
obtained by the method of Dio Cassius, according to which the sue 
cessive week-days take their names from the planet which rules the 
first hour of the day, so that alternately a member of the periodical 
seveu-membered planet-series is to be taken, and twenty-three mem- 
bers to be passed over. Now it is immaterial, in the case of a period- 
ical series, whether it is a certain number of members which is passed 
over, or whether it is this number increased by any multiple of the 
number of members (in this case seven) of the period. By passing 
over twenty-three (=3.7-|-2) members, according to the second meth- 
od, that of the planetary hours, the same result is obtained as when the 
first method, that of the decans, is adopted, in which only two members 
are to be passed over. 

Attention has already been directed (page 92, note +) to the remark- 
able resemblance between the fourth day of the week, dies Mercm-ii, 
of the Indian Budha-vdra, and the old Saxon Wodanes-dag. (Jacob 
Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie, 1844, bd. i., p. 844.) The identity af- 
firmed by William Jones to exist between the founder of the Buddhist 
religion and the race of Odin or Wuotan, and Wotan, famous in North- 
ern heroic tales, as well as in the history of Northern civilization, will, 
perhaps, gain more interest when it is called to mind that the name of 
Wotan is met with in a part of the new continent as belonging to a half- 
mythical, ha.f-historical personage concerning whom I have collected 
Vol. IV.— E 



98 COSMOS. 

(Jupiter and Mars) originated, as Salmasius has shown, with 
his ordinary acuteness, from letters, and were very different 
from ours ; the present form reaches scarcely beyond the fif- 

a great number of notes in my work on the monuments an d myths of 
the natives of America (Vv.es des Cordilleres et Monumens des Pe2iple$ 
Indigenes de VAmirique, tom. i., p. 208, and 382-384 ; tom. ii., p. 356). 
This American Wotan is, according to the ti-aditions of the natives of 
Chiapa and Soconusco, the gi-andson of the man vv^ho saved his life in 
a boat during the great dehige, and renewred the human race ; he com- 
menced the erection of large buildings, during which time ensued a 
confusion of languages, war, and dispersion of races, as in the erection 
of the Mexican pyramids of Cholula. His name was also transferred 
to the calendar of the natives of Chiapa, as was the name of Odin in 
the north of Germany. One of the five-day periods — four of which 
formed the month of the people of Chiapa and the Aztecs — was named 
after him. While the names and signs of the days among the Aztecs 
were taken from animals and plants, the natives of Chiapa (properly 
Teochiapan) assigned to the days of the month the names of twenty 
chieftains who, coming from the north, had led them so far southward. 
The names of the four most heroic, Wotan or Wodan, Lambat, Been, 
and Chinax, commenced the small periods of five-day weeks, as did the 
symbols of the four elements among the Aztecs. Wotan and the other 
chieftains indisputably belonged to the race of the Tolteks, who invaded 
the country in the seventh century. Ixtlilxochitl (his Christian name 
was Fernando de Alva), the first historian of his people (the Aztecs), 
says distinctly, in the manuscripts which he completed as early as the 
beginning of the sixteenth century, that the province of Teochiapan 
and the whole of Guatemala were peopled by Tolteks from one coast 
to the other ; indeed, in the beginning of the conquest of the Spaniards, 
a family was still living in the village Teopixca who boasted of being 
descended from Wotan. The Bishop of Chiapa, Francisco Nunez de la 
Vega, who presided over a provincial council in Guatemala, has, in his 
Preambulo de las Constituciones Diocesanas, collected a great deal of 
information respecting the American tradition of Wotan. It is also still 
very undecided whether the tradition of the first Scandinavian Odin 
(Odinn, Othinus) or Wuotan, who is said to have emigrated from the 
banks of the Don, has an historical foundation. (Jacob Grimm, 
Deutsche Mythologie, bd. i., p. 120-150.) The identity of the Ameri- 
can and Scandinavian Wotan, certainly not founded on mere resem- 
blance of sound, is still quite as doubtful as the identity of Wuotan 
(Odinn) and Buddha, or that of the names of the founder of the Bud 
dhist religion and the planet Budha. 

The assumption of the existence of a seven-day Peruvian week, which 
is 80 often brought forward as a Semitic resemblance in the division of 
time in both continents, is founded upon a mere error, as has been al 
ready proved by Father Acosta {Hist. Natural y Moral de las India$ 
1591, lib. vi., cap. 3), who visited Peru soon after the Spanish conquest 
and the Inca, Garcilaso de la Vega, himself coi-rects his previous state 
ment (parte i., lib. ii., c. 35) by distinctly saying there were three fes 
tivals in each of the months which were reckoned after the moon, and 
that the people should work eight days and rest upon the ninth (parte 
i., lib. vi., cap. 23). The so-called Peruvian weeks, therefore, con 
disted of nine days. (See my Vues det CordilUn§, tom. i., p. 341-343 



THE PLANETS. 90 

teenth century. The symbolizing habit of consecrating cer- 
tain metals to the planets belongs, undoubtedly, to the new 
Platonic doctrines of the Alexandrian school in the fifth cen- 
tury, as is ascertained from passages in Proclus {ad Tim., ed. 
Basil, p, 14), from Olympiodorus, as well as by a late scholium 
to Pindar {Isthm., vol. ii.). (Compare Olympiod., Comment, 
m Aristot., Meteorol.., cap. 7, 3 in Ideler's edition of the Me- 
ieorol., tom. ii., p. 163 ; also tom. i., p. 199 and 251 .) 

Although the number of the visible planets amounted, ac- 
cording to the earliest limitation, to five, and subsequently, 
by the addition of the large disks of the Sun and Moon, in- 
creased to seven, conjectures were prevalent; even in antiqui- 
ty, that beyond these visible planets there were yet other less 
luminous, unseen planets. This opinion is stated by Simpli- 
cius to be Aristotelean. " It is probable that such dark cos- 
mic al bodies which revolve round the common center some- 
times give rise to eclipses of the moon as well as the earth." 
Artemidorus of Ephesus, whom Strabo often mentions as a 
geographer, believed in the existence of an unlimited number 
of such dark, revolving cosmical bodies. The old ideal body, 
the anti-earth (dvrcxOcov) of the Pythagoreans, does not be- 
long to this class of conjectures. The earth and the anti- 
earth have a parallel concentric motion ; and the anti-earth, 
conceived in order to avoid the assumption of the rotatory 
motion of the eaYth, moving in a planetary manner round . 
the central fire in twenty-four hours, can scarcely be any 
thing else than the opposite hemisphere — the antipodean 
portion of our planet. =^ 

When from the 43 principal and secondary planets now 
known (a number six times greater than that of the planet- 
ary bodies known to the ancients), the 36 objects which have 
been discovered since the invention of the telescope are chro- 
nologically separated according to the succession of their dis- 
covery, there is obtained for the seventeenth century nine, 
for the eighteenth century also nine, and for the half of the 
nineteenth century eighteen newly-discovered planet*. 

* Bockh Ueber Philolaut, p. 102 and 117. 



100 COSMOS. 

Sequence of the Planetary Discoveries {of principal and 
secondary planets) since the Invention of the Telescope 
in the Year 1608. 

(A.) The Seventeenth Century. 

Four satelUtes of Jupiter : Simon Marius, at Anshach, De- 
cember 29, 1609 ; Galileo, January 7, 1610, at Padua. 

Triple configuration of Saturn : Galileo, November, 1610 , 
Hevelius, hypothesis of two lateral bars, 1656 ; Huygens, 
final discovery of the true form of the ring, December 7, 
1657. 

The sixth satellite of Saturn (Titan) : Huygens, March 25, 
1655. 

The eighth satellite of Saturn (the outermost, Japetus) : Do- 
min. Cassini, October, 1671. 

The fifth satellite of Saturn (Rhea) : Cassini, December 23, 
1672. 

The third and fourth satellites of Saturn (Tethys and Dione) : 
Cassini, end of March, 1684. 

(B.) The Eighteenth Century. 

Uranus : WilHam Herschel, May 13, 1781, at Bath. 

The second and fourth satellitss of Uranus : "William Her- 
schel, January 11, 1787. 

The first satellite of Saturn (Mimas) : "William Herschel, 
August 28, 1789. 

The second satellite of Saturn (Enceladus) : William Her- 
schel, September 17, 1789. 

The first satellite of Uranus : William Herschel, January 18, 
1790. 

The fifth satellite of Uranus : William Herschel, February 
9, 1790. 

The sixth satellite of Uranus : William Herschel, February 
28, 1794. 

The third satellite of Uranus : William Herschel, March 26, 
1794. 

(C.) The Nineteenth Century. 
Ceres*= : Piazzi, at Palermo, January 1, 1801. 
Pallas^ : Olbers, at Bremen, March 28, 1802. 
Juno*: Harding, at Lilienthal, September 1, 1804. 
Vesta*= : Olbers, at Bremen, March 29, 1807. 

(During 38 years no planetary discoveries w^ere made). 
AsTREA*^ : Hencke, at Dresden, December 8, 1845. 



THE PLANETS. IQI 

Neftune : Galle, at Berlin, September 23, 1846. 

The first satellite of Neptune : W. Lassell, at Starfield, near 
Liverpool, November, 1846 ; Bond, at Cambridge (U. S.). 

Hebe*': Hencke, at Dresden, July 1, 1847. 

Iris=^ : Hind, in London, August 13, 1847. 

Flora* : Hind, in London, October 18, 1847. 

Metis*: Graham, at Markree Castle, April 25, 1848. 

The seventh satellite of Saturn (Hyperion) : Bond, at Cam 
bridge (U. S.),' September, 16-19 ; Lassell, at Liverpool, 
September 19-20, 1848. 

Hygeia*= : De Gasparis, at Naples, April 12, 1849. 

Parthenope* : De Gasparis, at Naples, May 11, 1850. 

The second satellite of Neptune : Lassell, at Liverpool, Au- 
gust 14, 1850. 

Victoria* : Hind, in London, September 13, 1850. 

Egeria* : De Gasparis, at Naples, November 2, 1860. 

Irene* : Hind, in London, May 19, 1851 ; and De Gasparis, 
at Naples, May 23, 1851. 

In this chronological summary* the principal planets are 
distinguished from the secondary planets or satellites by a dif- 
ferent type. Some bodies are included in the class of princi- 
pal planets, which form a peculiar and very extended group, 
forming, as it were, a ring of 132 millions of geographical 
miles, situated between Mars and Jupiter, and are generally 
called small planets, as well as telescopic planets, co-planets, 
asteroids, or planetoids. Of these, four were discovered in the 
first seven years of this century, and ten during the last six 
years ; which latter circumstance is to be attributed less to 
the perfection of the telescopes, than the industry and dex- 
terity of the investigators, and especially the improved charts 
enlarged by additions of fixed stars of the ninth and tenth 
magnitudes. It is now more easy to distinguish between 

* In the history of the discoveries, it is necessary to distinguish be- 
tween the epoch at which the discovery was made, and the time of its 
first announcement. In consequence of a neglect of this distinction, 
dissimilar and erroneous dates have been inti'oduced into astronomical 
manuals. So, for example, Huygens discovered the sixth satellite of 
Saturn (Titan) on March 25, 1655 {Huy genii Opera vaHa, 1724, p. 523;, 
and did not announce it until March 5, 1656) Systema Saturnium, 1659, 
p. 2). Huygens, who devoted himself uninterruptedly from March, 
1655, to the study of Saturn, had already obtained the full and indubi 
table view of the open ring on December 17, 1657 {Systema Satuminm, 
p. 21), but did not publish his scientific explanation of all the phenom- 
ena until the year 1659. (Galileo had thought that he saw, on each 
eide of the planet, only two projecting circular disks.) 



i02 COSMOS. 

moving 3osmica- bodies and fixed. See CosmoSy vol. iii., p. 
115.) 

The number of the principal planets has been exactly doub- 
led since the first volume of Cosmos appeared, =^ so excessive- 
ly rapid is the succession of discoveries, the extension and per- 
fection of the topography of the planetary system. 

2. Classification of the Planets in tivo Groups. — If the 
region of small planets situated in the solar system between 
the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, but, on the whole, nearer to 
the former, is considered as a separating zone — as it were, an 
intermediate group — then, as has already been remarked, those 
planets which are nearest to the sun, the interior (Mercury, 
Venus, the Earth, and Mars), present several resemblances 
among each other, and contrasts with the exterior planets 
(Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune), or those which are 
more remote from the sun, beyond this separating zone. Of 
these three groups, the intermediate one occupies a space 
scarcely equal to half the distance of the orbit of Mars from 
that of Jupiter. Of the space between the two great princi- 
pal planets, Mars and Jupiter, that part which is nearest to 
Mars is, as far as has hitherto been observed, the most close- 
ly filled ; for if, in the zone which the asteroids occupy, the 
two outermost, Flora and Hygeia, are examined, it will be 
found that Jupiter is more than three times further from Hy- 
geia than Flora is from Mars. The most distinctive features 
of this intermediate group of planets are the great inclination 
and eccentricity of their interlacing orbits, and the extreme 
smallness of the planets. The inclination of the orbits to- 
ward the ecliptic increases in that of Juno to 13° 3', in that 
of Hebe even to 14° 47', of Egeria to 16° 33', of Pallas even 
to 34° 37' ; while in the same intermediate group it falls as 
low, in the orbit of Astrea, as 5° 19', in that of Parthenope 
to 4° 37', and that of Hygeia to 3° 47'. The whole of the 
orbits of the small planets having inclinations smaller than 
7° are, to go from the large to the small, those of Flora, Me- 
tis, Iris, Astrea, Parthenope, and Hygeia. Nevertheless, none 
of these orbits attain such a small degree of inclination as 
those of Venus, Saturn, Mars, Neptune, Jupiter, and Uranus. 
The eccentricities partly exceed even that of Mercury (0 206) ; 
for Juno, Pallas, Iris, and Victoria have 0255, 0239, 0232, 
and 0-218, while Ceres (0-076), Egeria (0-086), and Vesta 
(0089) have orbits less eccentric than Mars (0*093), without, 

* Cosmos, vol, i., p. 92. Compare also Encke, in Schumacher' s Astron 
Nachr., vol. xxvi., 1848, No 622, p. 347. 



THE PLANETS. 103 

/lowever, attaining to the approximative circular orbits of the 
other planets (Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus). The diameter 
of the telescopic planets is immeasurably small ; and accord- 
ing to observations made by Lament in Munich, and Madler 
with the Dorpat refractor, it is probable that the largest of 
the small planets is at the utmost only 145 geographical 
miles in diameter ; that is, one fifth of that of Mercury, one 
twelfth of that of the Earth. 

If the four planets nearest to the Sun, situated between the 
ring of the asteroids (the small planets) and the central body, 
are called interior planets, they will all agree in presenting 
a moderate size, a greater density, less flattened at the poles, 
and, at the same time, rotating slowly round their axes (in 
periods of rotation of nearly 24 hours), and, with the excep- 
tion of one (the Earth), without moons. On the contrary, the 
four exterior planets, those which are more remote from the 
Sun, situated between the ring of asteroids, and the, to us, un- 
known limits of the solar system (Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, 
and Neptune), are considerably larger, five times less dense, 
their axial rotation more than twice as rapid, and their num- 
ber of moons greater in the proportion of 20 to 1. The in- 
terior planets are all smaller than the Earth (Mercury and 
Mars \ and \ smaller in diameter) ; the exterior planets, on 
the contrary, are from 4*2 to 11*2 larger than the Earth. 
The density of the Earth being taken as ==1, the densities 
of Yenus and Mars are the same to within less than J^ ; the 
density of Mercury is also but very httle more, according to 
Encke's determination of his mass. On the contrary, none 
of the exterior planets exceed in density \ ; Saturn, indeed, 
is only |, almost only half the density of the other exterior 
planets and the Sun. The exterior planets present the soli- 
tary phenomenon of the whole solar system, the wonderful 
circumstance of one of its principal planets being surrounded 
by an unattached ring ; also atmospheres which, in conse- 
quence of the peculiarity of their condensation, appear to us 
variable ; in Saturn, indeed, sometimes as interrupted bands. 

Although in the important classification of the planets into 
two groups oi interior and exterior planets, the general char- 
acters oif absolute magnitude, density, flattening at the poles, 
velocity of rotation, absence of moons, present themselves as 
dependent upon the distances, i. e., from their semi-orbital 
axes, this dependence can not be affirmed of each one of these 
groups Up to the present time we are ignorant, as I have 
already remarked^ of *iay internal necessity, any mechanical 



104 COSMOS. 

law of nature, which (like the beautiful law which connects 
the square of the periods of revolution with the cube of the 
major axes) represents the above-named elements of the order 
of succession of the individual planetary bodies of each group 
in their dependence upon the distances. Although the planet 
which is nearest to the Sun (Mercury) is the densest, even 
six or eight times denser than some of the exterior planets, 
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, the order of succes- 
sion, in the case of Yenus,' the Earth, and Mars," or Jupiter, 
Saturn, and Uranus, is very irregular. The absolute mag- 
nitudes do generally, as Kepler has already observed (Har- 
monice Mundi, vol. iv., p. 194 ; Cosmos, vol. i., p. 93-97), 
increase with the distances; but this does not hold good 
when the planets are considered individually. Mars is small- 
er than the Earth, Uranus smaller than Saturn, Saturn small- 
er than Jupiter, and succeeds immediately to a host of plan- 
ets, which, on account of their smallness, are almost im- 
measurable. It is true the period of rotation generally in- 
creases with the distance from the Sun ; but it is, in the case 
of Mars, slower than in that of the Earth, slower in Saturn 
than in Jupiter. 

The external world of forms, I again repeat it, can only 
be represented in the enumeration of relations of space, as 
something actually existing in nature, and not as the subject 
of intellectual deductions of previously known causal rela- 
tions. No universal law for the cosmical regions is here 
traced, any more than for terrestrial regions in the culmina- 
ting points of mountain chains, or. in the configuration of con- 
tinents. These are natural facts which have resulted from 
the conflict of numerous attractive and repulsive forces, un- 
der conditions which are unknown to us. We here enter with 
eager and unsatisfied curiosity upon the obscure domain of 
incipient foTTnation. It is to t;hese phenomena that the so- 
frequently misused term of natural facts may be applied in 
its strictest sense, cosmical processes which have taken place 
during spaces of time of, to us, immeasurable extent. If the 
planets have been formed from revolving rings of nebulous 
matter, it must, after having commenced to aggregate into 
globes, according to the preponderating influence of individ- 
ual centers of attraction, have passed through an intermina- 
ble series of conditions in order to have formed sometimes 
simple, sometimes interwoven orbits, planets of such diflerent 
magnitudes, flattening, and density, with and without moons, 
and even, in one case, to blend the satellites into a solid ring. 



THE PLANETS. 



105 



The present form of things, and the exact numerical determ- 
inations of their relations, has not hitherto been able to lead 
us to a knowledge of the past states, or a clear insight into 
the conditions under which they originated. These condi- 
tions must not, however, on that account, be called accident- 
al, as men call every thing whose genetic organ they are not 
able to explain. 

3. Absolute and apparent Magnitude; Configuration. 
— The diameter of the largest of all the planets (Jupiter) is 
30 times as great as the diameter of the smallest of those 
which have been determined with certainty (Mercury) ; near- 
ly 11 times as great as the diameter of the Earth. Very 
nearly the same relations obtain between Jupiter and the 
Sun. Their diameters are nearly as 1 to 10. It has been 
asserted, perhaps erroneously, that the distance of the me- 
teoric stones, which there is a tendency to consider as small 
planetary bodies, from Vesta, which, according to a measure- 
ment- by Madler, is 66 geographical miles in diameter, there- 
fore 80 miles less than the diameter of Pallas according to 
Lament, is not greater than the distance of Vesta from the 
Sun. According to these relations, there must be meteoric 
stones of 517 feet in diameter. Fire-balls certainly have, 
while they retain a disk-like appearance, a diameter amount- 
ing to 2600 feet. 

The dependence of the flattening at the poles upon the ve- 
locity of rotation appears most strikingly in the comparison 
of the Earth as a planet of the interior group (Rot., 23''- 56'; 
Flattening, ^^g) with the exterior planet Jupiter (Rot., Q*"- 55'', 
Flattening, according to Arago, y^ ; according to John Her- 
gchel, yV). and Saturn (Rot., 10^- 29'; Flattening, yV)- But 
Mars, whose rotation is still 41 minutes slower than the ro- 
tation of the Earth, has, even when a much smaller result is 
assumed than that of William Herschel, very probably a much 
greater flattening. Does the reason of this anomaly, inas- 
.much as the figure of the surface of an elliptical spheroid 
ought to correspond with the velocity of rotation, consist in 
the difference of the law of the increasing density toward the 
center of the superincumbent strata? or in the circumstance 
that the liquid gurface of some planets was solidified before 
they could assume the figure appertaining to their velocity 
of rotation ? The important phenomena of the backward 
motion of the equinoctial points or the apparent advance ot 
the stars (precession), that of nutation (oscillation of the 
Earth's axis), and the variation of the inclination of the 
E 2 



106 COSMOS. 

ecliptic, depen 1, as theoretical astronomy proves, upon the 
configuration. 

The absolute magnitudes of the planets, and their distance 
from the Earth, determine their apparent diameter. We 
have, therefore, to arrange the planets according to their ab- 
solute (actual) magnitudes, proceeding from the larger to 
the smaller : 

The small planets with involved orbits, of which the larg- 
est appsars to be Pallas and Vesta : 

Mercury, Neptune, 

Mars, Uranus, 

Venus, Saturn, 

Earth, Jupiter. 

The apparent equatorial diameter of Jupiter, at a mean 
distance from the Earth, is 38"'4, while that of Venus, which 
is nearly equal in magnitude to the Earth, is only 16-9"; 
that of Mars, 5''-8. But the apparent diameter of the disk 
of Venus increases in the inferior conjunction to 62", while 
that of Jupiter attains only an increase to 46". It is neces- 
sary to call to mind in this place that the point of the orbit 
of Venus at which it appears to us with the brightest light, 
falls between the inferior conjunction and her greatest digres- 
sion from the Sun, because in that position the small lumin- 
ous crescent gives the most intense light, on account of its 
greatest proximity to the Earth, Upon the average, Venus 
appears the most beautifully luminous, even casting shadows 
in the absence of the Sun, when at a distance of 40° east or 
west from the Sun ; the apparent diameter then amounts to 
only 40", and the greatest width of the illuminated phase is 
scarcely 10". 

Apparent Diameter of Seven Planets. 

Mercury at a mean distance 6"'7 (oscillates from 4"'4 to 12") 



Venus 


(( 




16" 


•9 ( " 9"-5 to 62") 


Mars 


" 




5"-8 ( *' 3"-3 to 23") 


Jupiter 


(( 




38"-4 ( " 30" to 46") 


Saturn 


C( 




17"-1 ( '* 15" to 20") 


Uranus 


(( 




3"- 9 


Neptune 


(( 




2"-7 


The volumes of the 


planets in relation to the Earth are ; 


Mercury 


as 


1 : 


16-7 


Jupiter as 1414 : 1 


Venus 


(( 


1 : 


1-05 


Saturn " 735 : 1 


Earth 


(( 


1 : 


1 


Uranus " 82 : 1 


Mars 


&lt;&lt; 


1 : 


7-14 


Neptune " 108 : 1 



THE PLANETS. 107 

while the volume of the Sun is to that of the Earths 1407124. 
Small alterations in the measurements of the diameters in- 
crease the data of volumes in the ratio of their cubes. 

The moving planets which agreeably enliven the aspect of 
the heavens, influence us simultaneously by the magnitudes 
of their disks and their proximity, by the color of their light, 
by scintillation — which is not entirely wanting to some plan- 
ets, in certain positions — and by the peculiarity wiih which 
their different surfaces reflect the Sun's light. Whether a 
feeble evolution of light from the planets themselves modifies 
the intensity and properties of their light, is a problem which 
still remains to be solved. 

4. Arrangement of the Planets and their Distances from 
the Sun. — In order to form a general conception of the plan- 
etary system as a whole, so far as it is yet known, and to rep- 
resent it in its mean distances from the central body, the Sun, 
the following table is given, in which, as has always been the 
custom in astronomy, the mean distance of the Earth from 
the Sun (20,682,000 geographical miles) is taken as unity. 
The greatest and smallest distances of the individual planets 
from the Sun in aphelion and perihelion — according as the 
planet is situated in the ellipse whose focus is occupied by 
the Sun, at that point of the major axis (line of apsides) which 
is the farthest from or nearest to the focus — will be added 
afterward, when treating of the planets individually. By the 
mean distance from the Sun, of which alone mention will be 
made in this place, is to be understood the mean of the great- 
est and smallest distance, or the half major axis of the plan- 
et's orbit. It must also be observed, that the numerical data 
employed, both previously and hereafter, are for the most part 
taken from Hausen's careful classification of the planetary 
elements in Schumacher's Jahrbuch for 1837. Where .the 
data refer to time, they are, in the case of the older and larger 
planets, for the year 1800 ; but in the case of Neptune, for 
the year 1851, by the aid of the Berlin astronomischen Jahr- 
buch of 1853. The comparison of the small planets occur- 
ring afterward, and for which I am indebted to Dr. Galle, 
refers exclusively to more recent epochs. 

Distances of the Planets from the Sun. 

Mercury 0-38709 ( Earth 1-00000 

Venus. 0-72333 Mars 1-52369 



108 COSMOS. 

Small Planets. 

Egeria 2'579 

Juno 2-669 

Ceres 2768 



Flora 2-202 

Victoria 2-335 

Vesta 2-362 

Iris 2-385 

Metis 2-386 

Hebe 2-425 

Parthlnope 2.448 

Irene 2553 

Astrea 2-577 



Pallas 1-773 

Hygeia 3-151 

Jupiter 5-20277 

"Saturn 9-53885 

Uranus 19*18239 

Neptune 30-03628 



The simple observation of rapidly diminishing periods of 
revolution, from those of Saturn and Jupiter to Mars and 
Venus, led, at a very early time, under the assumption that 
the planets were attached to movable spheres, to conjectures 
as to the distances of these spheres from each other. As 
there are no traces of methodically-instituted observations 
and measurements to be found among the Greeks before the 
time of Aristarchus of Samos, and the establishment of the 
Alexandrinian Museum, a great difference arose in the hypoth- 
esis as to the arrangement of the planets and their relative 
distances ; whether according to the most prevailing system, 
with reference to their distances from the Earth as the fixed 
center, or, as among the Pythagoreans, with reference to the 
distances from the focus of the universe. The principal sub- 
ject on which there was a discrepancy of opinion was the 
position of the Sun, that is, its relative situation in reference 
to the inferior planets and the Moon.^ The Pythagoreans, 
who considered number to be the source of all knowledge, the 
real essence of all existing things, applied their theory of num- 
bers, the all-blending doctrine of numerical relations, to the 
geometrical consideration of the five regular bodies, to the 
musical intervals of tone which determine, accord, and form 
different kinds of sound, and even to the system of the uni- 
verse itself, supposing that the moving, and, as it were, vi- 
brating planets, exciting sound-waves, must produce a spher- 
al music, according to the harmonic relations of their inter- 
vals of space. • " This music," they add, "would be perceived 

* BOckh, De Platonico Syst., p. xxiv., and in Philolaos, p. 100. The 
succession of the planets, which, as we have just seen (page 94, note), 
gave rise to the naming of the week-days after the planetary deities, 
that of Geminus is distinctly called the oldest by Ptolema)us. (Almag., 
xi., cap. i.) He blames the motives from which ** the moderns haM^ 
placed Venus and Mercury beyond the Sun." 



THE PLANETS. 109 

by tho human ear if it was rendered insensible by extreme 
familiarity, as it is perpetual, and men are accustomed to it 
from childhood."* The harmonic part of the Pythagorean 
doctrine of numbers thus became connected with the figura- 
tive representation of the Cosmos precisely in the Platonic 
Timseus ; for " cosmogony is to Plato the work of the union 
of opposite first causes, brought about by harmony."! Ho 
attempted, moreover, to illustrate the tones of the universe in 
an agreeable picture, by attributing to each of the planetary 
spheres a syren, who, supported by the stern daughters of Ne- 
cessity, the three Fates, maintain the eternal revolution of the 
world's axis." J Such a representation of the Syrens, in whose 
place the Muses are sometimes substituted as the choir of 
heaven, has been, in many cases, handed down to us in an- 
tique monuments, especially in carved stones. Mention is 
constantly made of the harmony of the spheres, although gen 
erally reproachfully, throughout the writings of Christian an- 
tiquity, and all those of the Middle Ages, from Basil the Great 
to Thomas Aquinas and Petrus Alliacus.§ 

* The Pythagoreans affirm, in order to justify the reality of the tones 
produced by the revolution of the spheres, that hearing takes place only 
where there is an alternation of sound and silence. — Aristot., De Ccelo, 
ii., 9, p. 290, No. 24-30, Bekker. The inaudibility of the spheral music 
is also accounted for by its overpowering the senses. — Cicero, De Rep., 
vi., 18. Aristotle himself calls the Pythagorean tone-myth pleasing 
and ingenious {KOfitpug koI nepiTTug), but untrue (1. c. No. 12-15). 

t Bockh, in Philolaus, p. 90. 

X Plato, De Republica, x., p. 617 {Davis's translation, Bohn's Class. 
Lib., p. 307). He estimates the planetary distances according to two 
entirely difterent progressions, one by doubling, the other by tripling, 
from which results the series 1. 2. 3. 4. 9. 8. 27. It is the same series 
which is found in the Timseus, where the subject of the arithmetical 
division of the woi-ld — spirit (p. 35, Steph., Davis's trans., Bohn's Class. 
Lib.), which Demiurgus propounds, is treated of. Plato had, indeed, 
considered the two geometrical progressions 1. 2. 4. Sand 1. 3. 9. 27 
together, and thus alternately taken each successive number from one 
of the two series, whence resulted the above-mentioned succession 1. 

2. 3. 4. 9 Compare Bockh in the Studien von Daub und Creu- 

zer, bd. iii., p. 34-43 ; Martin, Etudes sur le Tim6e, tom. i., p. 384, and 
tom. ii., p. 64. (Compare also Prevost, Sur VAme d'apres Platon, in the 
M6m. del' Acad, de Berlin for 1802, p. 90 and 97 ; the same in the Bibli- 
oth^que Britannique, Sciences et Arts, tom. xxxvii..ll08, p. 153.) 

$ See the acute woi-k of Professor Ferdinand Piper, Von der Harmo' 
nie der Sphdren, 1850, p. 12-18. The supposed relation of the seven 
vowels of the old Egyptian language to the seven planets, and Gustav 
Seyftarth's conception, already disproved by Zoega's and Tdlken's in- 
vestigations, of the astrological hymns, rich m vowels, of the Egyptian 
priests, according to passages of Pseudo-Demetrius Fhalaereus (perhaps* 
Demetrius of Alexandria), an epigram of Eusebius, and a Gnostic maa 



110 COSMOS. 

At ini vlose of the sixteenth century, all the Pythagoiean 
and Platonic views of the system of the universe were again 
reajiimated in the person of the imaginative Kepler. He, in 
the first instance, constructed the planetary system in the 
Mysterium Cosmographicum, in accordance with the prin- 
ciple of the five regular solids, which may be imagined as 
situated between the planetary spheres, then in the Harmo- 
nice Mundi, according to the intervals of tone.* Convinced 
of the regularity of the relative distances of the planets, he 
believed that he had solved the problem by a happy combi- 
nation of his earlier and later views. It is extremely re- 
markable that Tycho Brahe, who in other respects is found 
to be so strictly attached to actual observation, had already 
expressed the opinion (controverted by Rothmann) that the 
revolving cosmical bodies were capable of vibrating the ce- 
lestial air (what we now call resisting medium) so as to pro- 
duce tones, t But the analogies between the relations of tone 
and the distances of the planets, which Kepler so long and 
laboriously endeavored to trace out, remained, in his opinion, 
as it appears to me, entirely with the domain of abstract 
speculation. He congratulated himself upon having, to the 
greater glorification of the Creator, discovered musical rela- 
tions of number in the relations of cosmical space ; as if, in 
poetic enthusiasm, he makes "Venus, together with the 
Earth, sound sharp in aphelion and flat in perihelion; the 
highest tone of Jupiter and that of Yenus must coincide in 
flat accord." In spite of these merely symbolical expres- 
sions, so frequently employed, Kepler says positively, "Jam 
soni in coelo nuUi existunt, nee tam turbulentus est motus, ut 
ex attritu aurcB codestis eliciatur stridor. $ {Harmonice 
Mundi, lib. v., cap. 4.) The thin and clear celestial air 
(aura'coBlestis) is also mentioned here again. 

The comparative consideration of the planetary intervals 
with the regular bodies which would fill these intervals, en- 

uscript in Leyden, have been minutely treated of with critical erudition 
by the younger Ideler (Hermapion, 1841, pars i., p. 198-214). Com- 
pare also Ijoheck, A glaoph., torn, ii., p. 932. 

* On the gradual development of the musical ideas of Kepler, vide 
Apelt's Commentary of the Harmonice Mundi, in his work ; Johann 
Kepler's Weltansicht, 1849, p. 76-116. (Compare also Delambre, 
Hist, de VAstronom. Mod., tom. i., p. 352-360.) 

t Cosmos, vol. ii., p. 316. 

X [Now there are no such things as sounds among the heavenly 
bodies, nor is their motion so turbulent as to elicit noise from the at 
trition of the celestial air.] 



THE PLANETS. Ill 

couraged Kepi jr to extend his hypothesis even so far as the 
region of fixed stars.* The circumstance which, on the oc- 
casion of the discovery of Ceres, and the other so-called small 
planets, first forcibly recalled to mind Kepler's Pythagorean 
arguments, was his almost forgotten conjecture as to the prob- 
able existence of a yet unseen planet in the great planetless 
chasm between Mars and Jupiter. ('* Motus semper distan- 
tiam pone sequi videtur ; atque ubi magnus hiatus erat inter 
orbes, erat et inter motus. "f) " I have become more daring," 
he says, in the introduction to the Mysterium Cosmography 
icum, " and place a new planet between Jupiter and Mars, 
as also (a conjecture which was less fortunate, and remained 
long unnoticed^) another planet between Venus and Mercu- 
ry ; neither of these have been seen, probably on account of 
their extreme smallness.§ Kepler subsequently found that 

* Tycho had denied the existence of the crystalline spheres, in which 
the planets were supposed to be fixed. Kepler praised the undertak- 
ing, but he still adhered to the opinion that the sphere of fixed stars 
was a solid globular shell of two German miles in thickness, upon which 
are the twelve fixed stars, which are all situated at equal distances from 
us, and have a peculiar relation to the corners of an icosahedron. The 
fixed stars " lumina sua ab intus emittunt;" " emit light from their own 
bodies ;" he also considered for a long time that the planets were self- 
luminous, until Galileo taught him better! Although he, like many 
other of the ancients and Giordano Bruno, considered the fixed stars to 
be suns like our own, still he was not much inclined to entertain the 
opinion, which he had well considered, that all fixed stars are sur- 
rounded by planets, as I had formerly stated them to be. ( Cosmos, vol. 
ii., p. 328.) Compare Apelt, Commentary to the Harmonice, p. 21-24. 

t [" There seems to be always a close relation between the motion 
and the distance [of the planets]; that is to say, where there is a great 
interval between their orbs, the same exists also between their mo- 
tions."] 

X It was not until the year 1821 that Delambre, in the Hist, de VAs- 
iron. Mod., torn, i., p. 314, directed attention to the planets which Kep- 
ler conjectured to lie between Mercury and Venus, in the extracts 
which are complete with regard to astronomy, but not with regard to 
astrology, from Kepler's collected works (p. 314-615). "On n'a fait 
aucune attention k cette supposition de Kepler, quand on a forme des 
projets de decouvrir la planete qui (selon une autre de ces predic- 
tions) devait circuler entre Mars et Jupiter." " No attention was paid 
to that supposition of Kepler's when projects were formed for discover- 
ing the planet, which (according to another of his predictions) ought to 
revolve between Mars and Jupiter." 

§ The remarkable passage respecting a space to be filled up between 
Mars and Jupiter [hiatus] is in KeTpXcv' s Prodromus Dissertaiionum Cos- 
mographicarum, coniinens Mysterium. Cosmo grapkictim de admirabili 
proportione Orbium Coelestium, 1596, p. 7: &lt;' Cum igitur hac non succe- 
deret, alia via, mirum quam audaci, tentavi aditum. Inter Jovem et 
Martem interposui novum planetam, itemque alium inter Venerem et 



113 COSMOS. 

he did not require these new planets for hi« solar system 
founded upon the properties of the regular solids ; it was only 
necessary to modify the distances of the old planets a little 
arbitrarily. ('' Non reperies novos et incognitos planetas, ut 
paulo antea, interpositos, non ea mihi probatur audacia ; sed 
illos veteres parum admodum luocatos''^ — Myst. Cosmogr., 
p. 10.) The ideal tendencies of Kepler were so analogous 
to those of the Pythagorean school, and still more to those of 
Plato expressed in the Timceus,^ that in the same way as 
Plato [Cratyl., p. 409) assumed, in addition to the difier- 
ences of tone in the planetary spheres, those of color, Kepler 
likewise instituted some experiments [Astron. Opt., cap. 6, 
p. 261) for the purpose of detecting the colors of the planets. 
Even the great Newton, always so precise in his conclusions, 
was inclined, as Prevost has already remarked (^Mem. de 
VAcad. de Berlin for 1802, p. 77 and 93), to reduce the di- 

Mercurium, quos duos forte ob exilitatem non videamus, iisque sua 
tempora periodica ascripsi. Sic enim existimabam me aliquam aequal- 
itatem proportioniim effecturum, quae proportiones inter biuos versus 
Solem ordine minuerentur, versus fixas augescerent ; ut propior est 
Terra Veneri quantitate ori)is terrestris, quara Mars Terrse, in quanti- 
tate orbis Martis. Verum hoc pacto neque unius planetiB interpositio 
sufBciebat ingenti hiatu, Jovem inter et Martem: manebat enim major 
Jovis ad ilium novum proportio, quam est Saturni ad Jovem. Rursus 
alio modo exploravi." '' When this plan therefore failed, I tried to 
reach my aim in another way, of, I must confess, singular boldness. 
Between Jupiter and Mars I interposed a new planet, and another also 
between Venus and Mercury, both which it is possible are not visible 
on account of their minuteness, and I assigned to them their respective 
periods. For in this way I thought that I might in some degree equal- 
ize their ratios, which ratios regularly diminished toward the Sun, and 
enlarged toward the fixed stars, as the Earth is nearer to Venus than 
Mars is to the Earth. , But even in this way the interposition of one 
planet did not supply the great chasm between Jupiter and Mars, for 
the ratio between Jupiter and the supposed new planet still remained 
greater than between Saturn and Jupiter. Again. I tried in another 
way." Kepler was twenty-five years of age when he wrote this. It 
may be seen how his restless mind formed hypotheses, and again quick- 
ly forsook them, to deceive himself with others. He always retained 
a hopeful faith in being able to discover numerical laws where matter 
had aggregated under the manifold disturbances of attractive forces 
(disturbances whose combinations are incalculable, as are so many past 
events and formations on account of our ignorance of the accompanying 
conditions), aggregated into globes, revolving in orbits, sometimes sim 
pie and almost parallel, sometimes grouped together and surprisingly 
complicated. 

* [" You will not find new and unknown planets, as I said before ; 
that boldness I do not approve of; but you will find the old ones a little 
altered in position."] 

t {Plato's Wo'ks translated, vol. ii., Bohn'e Classical Libraiy."] 



THE PLAN.ETS. 113 

mensions of the seven colors of the spectrum to the diatonio 
scale.* 

The hypothesis of yet unknown merahers of the planetary 
series calls to mind the opinion of Hellenic antiquity, that 
there were far more than five planets ; these were, indeed, 
all that had been observed, but many others might remain 
unseen, on account of the feebleness of their light and. their 
position. Such a doctrine was especially attributed to Arte- 
midorus of Ephesus.f Another old Hallenic, and perhaps 
even Egyptian belief, appears to have teen, that " the celes- 
tial bodies which we now see were not all visible in earlier 
times." Connected with such a physical, or, much rather, 
historical myth, is the remarkable form of the praise of a 
high antiquity which some races ascribed to themselves. 

Thus the pre-Hellenic Pelasgian inhabitants of Arcadia 
called themselves Proselenes, because they boasted that they 
came into the country before the Moon accompanied the 
Earth. i?re-Hellenic and pre-lunarian were synonymous. 
The appearance of a star was represented as a celestial event, 
as the Deucalionic flood was a terrestrial event. Apuleius 
(Apologia, vol. ii., p. 494, ed. Oudendorp ; Cosmos, vol. ii., 
p. 189, note) extends the flood as far as the Gatulean mount- 
ains of Northern Africa. Apollonius Rhodius, who, accord- 
ing to Alexandrian custom, was fond of imitating old models, 
speaks of the early colonization of the Egyptians in the val- 

* Newtoni Opuscula Mathematica, Philosophica et Philologica, 17 M, 
torn, ii., Opusc. xviii., p. 246: "Chordatn musice divisam potius adhi- 
bui, non tantum quod cum phaenominis (hicis) optime couvenit, sed 
quod fortasse, aliquid circa colorum harmonias (quarum pictores non 
penitus ignari sunt), sonorum concordantiis fortasse analogas, involvat. 
Quemadmodum verisimilius videbitur animadvertenti affitiitatem, qu® 
est inter extimam Purpuram (Violarura colorem) ac Rubedinem, colo- 
rum extremitates, qualis inter octavae terminos (qui pro unisonis quo- 
dammodo haberi possunt) reperitur." " I preferred employing the di- 
visions of the musical chord, not only because they harmonize best with 
the phenomena [of light], but because it is possible there may be some 
latent analogy between the harmonies of .colors (with which painters 
are not altogether unacquainted) and the concords of sounds. This 
will appear more probable to any one who shall notice the similarity 
of relations between violet and red, the extreme colors [on the spec- 
trum], and the highest and lowest notes of the octave, which somehow 
may be considered as in unison." — Compare also Prevost in the MSm. 
de VAcad, de Berlin for 1802, p. 77 and 93. 

t Seneca, Nat. Qucest. VII., 13 : " Non has tantum Stellas quinque 
discurrere, sed solas observatas esse : ceterum innumerabiles ferri per 
occultum." " Not that these five stars only moved, but that they only 
had been observed, for a countless number are borne along beyond the 
reach of vision." 



114 rosMos. 

'ey of the Nile : " the stars did not yet revolve in the heavens ; 
nor ha(?. the Danaides yet appeared, or the race of Deucalion."^ 

* Since the explanations which Heyne has given of the origin of the 
astronomical myth of the Proselenes, so widely diffused in antiquity (Pg 
Arcadibus Luna Antiquioribus, in Opusc. Acad., vol. ii., p. 332), were 
msatisfactory to me, I was greatly rejoiced to receive from my acute 
philological friend, Professor Johannes Franz, a new and very happy 
dolution of this much-debated problem, by simple combinations of ideas. 
This solution is unconnected with either the arrangement of the calen* 
dar by the Arcadians, or their worship of the Moon. I restrict myself 
here to an extract from an unpublished and more extended work. This 
explanation will not be unwelcome to some of my readers in a work 
hi which I have made a rule frequently to trace back the whole of our 
present knowledge to the knowledge of the ancients, and even to tra- 
iitions believed generally or by very many. 

" We shall commence with a few of the principal passages from the 
undents which treat of the Proselenes. Stephanus of Byzantium (v. 
Ap/cdf) mentions the logographs of Hippys of Rhegium, a cotemporary 
of Darius and Xerxes, as the first who called the Arcadians ■Kpoailr]' 
■fovg. The scholiasts {ad Apollon. Rhod. IV., 264, and ad Aristoph., 
Nub., 397) agree in saying, the remote antiquity of the Arcadians be- 
comes most clear from the fact of their being called npoaeXrivoi. They 
appear to have been there before the Moon, as Eudoxus and Theodorus 
■ilso say ; the latter adds that it was shortly before the labors of Her- 
cules that the Moon appeared. In the government of the Tegeates, 
Aristotle states that the barbarians who inhabited Arcadia were driven 
jut by the later Arcadians before the Moon appeared, and therefore 
:hey were called -Kpoailrivoi. Others say, Endymion discovered the 
revolution of the Moon ; but, as he was an Arcadian, his countrymen 
ivere called after him irpoceXTjvoi. Lucian expresses himself slighting- 
ly. (Astrolog., 26.) According to him, it was from stupidity and folly 
that the Arcadians said they were there before the Moon. In the Schol. 
udj^lschyl., Prom., 436, it is observed, that TrpoaeXovfxevov is called v6pi- 
\6fiEvov, whence, therefore, the Arcadians were called TrpoaeTirjvoi, be- 
cause they are arrogant. The passages in Ovid as to the existence of 
the Arcadians before the Moon are universally known. Recently, in- 
deed, the idea has sprung up that all the ancients were deceived by 
ahe form TrpoaeTiijvoi, and that the word (properly irpoiXXijvoi) meant 
only pre-Hellenic, as Arcadia certainly was a Pelasgian country. 

"If, now, it can be proved," continues Professor Franz, " that an- 
other people connected their origin with another cosmical body, the 
irouble of taking refuge in deceptive etymological explanations will 
be obviated. This kind of testimony exists in the njost suitable form. 
The learned rhetorician Menander says literally in his work, De Econ- 
omOs (sec. ii., cap. 3, ed. Heeren), as follows: 'A third motive for the 
^iraise of objects is the time ; this is the case in all the most ancient na- 
tions : when we say of a town or of a country it was founded before 
this or that star, or with those stars, before the flood or after the flood 
•—as the Athenians affirm they originated at the same time as the Sun, 
Ike Arcadians before the Moon, the Delphiahs immediately after the 
3ood-^— these are epochs, and, as it were, starting-points in time.' 

" Therefore Delphi, the connection of which with the flood of Deu- 
oalion is otherwise prove 1 (Pausan., x., 6), is surpassed by Arcadia, 
tnd Arcadia by Athens. ApcUonius Rhodius, who was so fond of imi 



THE PLANETS. 115 

This important passage explains the praise of the Pelasgian 
Arcadia. 

I conclude these considerations respecting the distances of 
the planets, and their arrangement in space, with a law, 
which, however, scarcely deserves this name, and which is 
called by Lalande and Delambre a play of numbers; by oth- 
ers, a help for the memory. It has greatly occupied our la- 
borious Bode, especially at the time that Piazzi discovered 
Oeres : a circumstance, however, which was in no way occa- 
sioned by that so-called law, but rather by a misprint in Wol- 
iiston's Catalogue of the Stars. If any one is inclined to 
consider that discovery as the fulfillment of a prediction, it 
must not be forgotten that the latter, as we have already 
pointed out, extends back as far as Kepler, or more than a 
century and a half beyond Titius and Bode. Although the 
Berlin astronomer had already distinctly declared, in the sec- 
ond edition of his popular and extremely useful Anleitung 

tating old models, expresses himself quite in accordance with this pas- 
sage where he says (iv., 261), Egypt is said to have been inhabited be- 
fore all other countries ; ' the stars did not yet all revolve in the heavens; 
the Danaides had not yet appeared, nor the race of Deucalion ; the Ar- 
cadians alone existed ; those of whom it is said that they lived before 
the Moon, eating acorns upon the mountains.' In the same manner, 
Nonnus (xli.) says of the Syrian Bero6 that it was inhabited before the 
time of the Sun. 

" Such a habit of deriving determinations of time from epochs in the 
formation of the world is an offspring of the speculative period, in which 
all objects have still more vitality, and is most closely allied to the gen- 
ealogical local poetry ; so that it is not improbable that the tradition sung 
by an Arcadian poet of the battle of the giants in Arcadia, to which the 
above-quoted words of old Theodorus (whom some consider to be a 
Samothracian, and whose work must have been very comprehensive"* 
refer, may have given occasion to the general application of the epitnet 
TT-poaiTirjvoi to the Arcadians." With regard to the double names 'Ar- 
kades Pelasgoi,' and the opposition of a more ancient or recent peopling 
of Arcadia, compare the excellent work Der Peloponnesos, by Ernst 
Curtius, 1851, p. 160 and 180. In the New Continent, also, there is, 
as I have already shown in another place (see my Kleinen Schrifien, 
bd. i., p. 115), upon the elevated plain of Bogota, the race of JVIuyscas 
or Mozcas, who in their historical myths boast of a proselenic antiquity. 
The origin of the Moon is connected with the tradition of a great flood, 
which a woman who accompanied the miracle-worker Botschika had 
caused by her magical arts. Botschika drove away the woman (called 
Huythaca or Schia). She left the Earth, and became the Moon, " which 
until then had never shone upon the Muyscas." Botschika, pitying the 
human race, opened a steep rocky wall near Canoas, where the Rio de 
Tunzha now ruslies down, forming the famous waterfall Tequendama. 
The valley, filled with water, was then laid dry— a geognostic romance 
which occurs repeatedly : for example, in the closed Alpine valley of 
Cashmir, where the mighty drainer is called Kasyapa. 



116 COSMOS. 

ZUT Kenntniss des gestirnten Himmels, that " he had taken 
the law of the distances from a translation of Bonnet's Con- 
templation de la Nature, prepared by Professor Titius at 
"Wittenberg," still it has generally borne his name, and sel- 
dom that of Professor Titius. In a note which the latter add- 
ed to the chapter on the System of the Universe,*" he says, 
*' When the distances of the planets are examined, it is found 
that they are almost all removed from each other by distances 
which are in the same proportion as their magnitudes in- 
crease. If the distance from Saturn to the Sun is taken as 
100 parts, the distance of Mercury from the Sun is 4 such 
parts, that of Venus 4 + 3 = 7 such parts, the Earth 4 + 6 = 10, 
Mars 4+12 = 16. But from Mars to Jupiter there is a de- 
viation from this accurate (!) progression. Mars is foUowM 
by a space of 4 + 24 = 28 such parts, in which neither a prin- 
cipal planet nor a subordinate planet has yet been seen. Is 
it possible that the Creator should have left this space empty ? 
It can not be doubted that this space belongs to yet undis- 
covered satellites of Mars ; or that perhaps even Jupiter has 
further satellites around him, which have not hitherto been 
seen by any telescope. In this space (unknown to us as re- 
gards its contents) Jupiter's circle of action extends to 4 + 48 
= 52. Then follows Saturn in 4 + 96 = 100 parts — an ad- 
mirable proportion." Titius was therefore inclined to consid- 
er the space between Mars and Jupiter as containing, not 
one, but, as is actually the case, several cosmical bodies ; how- 
ever, he conjectured that they were more likely to be subor^ 
dinate than principal planets. 

Hov/ the translator and commentator of Bonnet obtained 
the number 4 for the orbit of Mercury, is nowhere stated. 
Perhaps he selected it only in order to have in combination 
with the easily divisible numbers 96, 48, 24, &amp;c., exactly 100 
for Saturn, at that time the most distant planet known, whose 
distance is 9-5, thus very nearly =100. It is less probable 
that he constructed the order of succession by commencing 
from the nearer planets. ' A sufficient correspondence of the 
law of duplication, setting out, not from the Sun, but from 
Mercury, with the true planetary distances, could not have 
been affirmed in the last century, as the latter were known 

* Karl Bonnet, Betrachtnng uber die Natur, translated by Titius, sec- 
ond edition, 1772, p. vii., note 2 (the first edition appeared in 1766). In 
Bonnet's original work no such law is noticed. (Compare also Bode, 
Anleit. zur Kenntniss des gsslirnten Himmels, second edition, 1772, p 
462.) 



THE PLANETS. 



117 



at that time with sufficient accuracy for this purpose. In 
reahty, the distances between Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus ap- 
proximate very closely to the duplication ; nevertheless, since 
the discovery of Neptune, v/hich is much too near to Uranus, 
the defectiveness in the progression has become strikingly ev- 
ident.* 

"What is called the law of Wurm of Leonberg, and some- 
times distinguished from the law of Titius and Bode, is mere- 
ly a correction' which Wurm made as to the distance of Mer- 
cury from the Sun, and the difference between the distances 
of Mercury and Venus. Approximating nearer to the fact, 
he fixes the former as 387, the latter 680, and the distance 
of the Earth 1000. f Gauss had already, on the occasion of 

* Since, according to Titius, the distance from the Sun to Saturn, 
then the outermost planet, is taken as =100, the individual distances 
should be, 

Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Small planets, Jupiter, 

4 7 10 _1_6_ _2 8 _5 2 

107 iWo 100 100 iFO" loir 

according to the so-called progression : 4, 4+3, 4+6, 4+12, 4+24, 

4+48 ; consequently, when the distance of Saturn from the Sun is taken 

as 789-2 million geographical miles, those of the other planets, expressed 

in the 'same measure, are.: 



Distances, according to Titius, in Geographical 
Miles. 



Actual Distance in 


Geographical Miles. 


32-0 millions. 


600 


82-8 


126-0 


220-8 


430-0 


789-2 


1586-8 


2484-8 



Mercury 31'6 millions. 

Venus 55-2 

Earth 78-8 

Mars 126-0 

Smallplanets 2208 " 

Jupiter 410 4 " 

Saturn 789-2 

Uranus 1586-8 " 

Neptune. ..3062-0 



t Wurm, in Bode^s Astron. Jakrbnch for the year 1790, 'p. 168; and 
Bode, Von dem neuen zwischen Mars und Jupiter entdeckten achten 
Hauptplaneten des Sonnensystems, 1802, p. 45. With the numerical cor- 
rection of Wurm, the series, according to the distances from the Sun, is : 

Mercury 387 Parts. 

Venus 387+ 293= 680. 

Earth 387+ 2-293= 973. 

Mars 387-f 4-293= 1559. 

Smallplanets 387-1- 8-293= 2731. 

Jupiter 387+ 16-293= 5075. 

Saturn 387-f 32-293= 9763. 

Uranus 387+ 64293=19139. 

Neptune 387+128-293=37891. 

In order' that the degree of accuracy of these results may be tested, 
the actual mean distances of the planets are given in the next table, as 
they are acknowledged at the present time with the addition of the 



118 



COSMOS. 



the discovery of Pallas by Olbers, aptly criticised the so- 
called law of distances in a letter to Zach (October, 1802). 
** The statement of Titius," says he, " contrary to the nature 
of all truths which merit the name of laws, agrees only ap- 
proximatively with observed facts in the case of most plan- 
ets, and, what does not appear to have been once observed, not 
at all in the case of Mercury. It is evident that the series 

4, 4+3, 4 + 6, 4+12, 4+48, 4+96, 4+192, 

with which the distances should correspond, is not a continu 
ous series at all. The member which precedes 4 + 3 should 
not be 4 ; i. e., 4+0, but 4 + 1|-. Therefore, between 4 and 
4 + 3, there should be an infinite number ; or, as "Wurm ex- 
presses it, for ^=1, there is obtained from 4 + 2"~^.3, not 4, 
but 5i. Otherwise, the attempt to discover such approxi- 
mative similarities in nature is by no means to be censured." 
5. Masses of the Planets. — These elements are determined 
by satellites when there are any, by the mutual disturbances 
of the principal planets among each other, or by the influence 
of a comet of brief revolution. In this way the hitherto un- 
known mass of Mercury was determined by Encke in 1841, 
by the disturbances which his comet suffered. The same 
comet offers a prospect of a future improvement in the esti- 
mation of the mass of Venus. The disturbances of Vesta aie 
applied to Jupiter. The mass of the Sun being taken as 
unity, those of the planets are (according to Encke, vierte 
Abhandlung uher den.Cometen von Pons in den Schriften 
der Berliner Akademie der Wissenschaften for 1842, p. 5) : 

Mercury TJe Kit 

Venus 47T8 3 9 

Earth 3 5 9S5T 

numbers which Kepler considered, in accordance with the Tychonio 
system, to be the true ones. I quote the latter from Newton's work 
l)e Mundi Systemate (Opuscula Math. Philos. et Philol., 1744, torn, ii., 
p22): 



Planets. 


Actual Distances. 


Kepler's Results. 


Mercury . ... -..-. 


0-38709 
0-72333 
1-00000 
1-52369 
2-66870 
5-20277 
9-53885 
19-18239 
30-03628 


0-38806 
0-72400 
1-00000 
1-52350 

5-19650 
9-51000 


Venus ............ . 


Earth 


Mars ... .... .... .... .... 


Juno ................ 


Jupiter .. ........ .... 


Saturn .. ................ 


Uranus . ............... 


Neptune ... ... ..... 





THE PLANETS. 



119 



(Earth and Moon together 

Mars ; 

Jupiter and his satellites . 

Saturn ,. 

Uranus 

Neptune 



311*99) 



2680 


33^ 


ToTT 


•87^ 


35^ 


TF 


24| 


OS 



The mass 



which Le Yerrier found, by means of his 



sagacious calculations, before the actual discovery of Neptune 
by Galle, is greater, although remarkably near to the truth. 
The arrangement of the principal planets, according to their 
increasing masses, is, when leaving out the small ones, the 
following : 

Mercury, Mars, Venus, Earth, Uranus, Neptune, Saturn, 
Jupiter ; 
thus, like the volumes and densities, entirely different from the 
order of succession of the distances from the central body. 

6. Densities of the Planets. — By applying the above quot- 
ed volumes and masses, the following numerical relations are 
obtained for the densities of the planets (according as the 
eirth or water is taken as unity) : 



Planets. 



Relation to the 


Relation to the 


Earth. 


density of Water. 


1-234 


6-71 


0-940 


5-11 


1-000 


5-44 


0-958 


5-21 


0-243 


1-32 


0-140 


0-76 


0-178 


0-97 


0-230 


1-25 



Mercury. 
Venus . . . 
Earth . . . 

Mars 

Jupiter . . 
Saturn .. 
Uranus . . 
Neptune . 



In the comparison of the density of the planets with water, 
the density of the Earth serves as a basis. Reich's experi- 
ments, made in Freiberg with the torsion balance, gave 
5-4383 : very nearly the same as the analogous experiments 
of Cavendish, which, according to the more accurate calcula- 
tions of Francis Baily, gave 5448. The result of Baily's 
own experiments is 5*660. It will be seen from the above 
table that Mercury, according to Encke's determination of 
mass, comes very near to the other planets of medium mag- 
nitude. 

This table calls to mind forcibly the classification, several 
times mentioned by me, of the planets into two groups, which 
are separated from each other by the zone of the small plan 



120 COSMOS. 

ets. The differences of density which are presented by Mars, 
Venus, the Earth, and even Mercury, are very slight ; almost 
equally similar among each other, but from 4 to 7 times less 
dense than the former group, are the planets more distant 
from the Sun — Jupiter, Neptune, Uranus, and Saturn. The 
density of the Sun (0-252, if the Earth is taken as I'OOO ; 
therefore, in reference to water, 1'37) is but little more than 
the densities of Jupiter and Neptune. Consequently, the 
planets and the Sun^ must be arranged, according to their 
increasing density, in the following order : 

Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, Jupiter, Sun, Venus, Mars, Earth, 
Mercury. 

Although, upon the whole, the densest planets are nearer to 
the Sun, still, when they are considered individually, their 
density is by no means proportional to the distances, as New- 
ton was inclined to assume. f 

7. Periods of Sidereal Revolution and Axial Rotation. 
— We shall confine ourselves here to giving the sidereal, or 
true periods of revolution of the planets in reference to the 
fixed stars, or a fixed point of the heavens. ■ During such a 
revolution, a planet passes through exactly 360 degrees in its 
course round the Sun. The sidereal revolutions of the plan- 
ets must be clearly distinguished from the tropical and synodic, 
the former of which refer to the return to the spring equinox, 
the latter to the difference of time between two consecutive 
conjunctions or oppositions. 

* The Sun (which Kepler considered to be magnetic, probably from 
3nthusiastic admiration for the divina inventa of his justly famous co 
temporary, William Gilbert, and whose rotation in the same direction 
as the planets he maintained long before the Sun-spots were discovered) 
Kepler declares, in his Comment, de moiibzis Stellce Martia (cap. 23), and 
in Astronomice pars Optica (cap. 6), to be " the densest of all cosmical 
bodies, because it moves all the others which belong to his system." 

t Newton, De Mundi Systemate, in Opusculis, tom. ii., p. 17 : " Cor- 
pora Veneris et Merturii majore Solis calore magis concocta et coagu- 
lata sunt. Planetae ulteriores, defectu caloris, carent substantiis illis 
metallicis Qt mineris ponderosis quibus Terra referta est. Densiora cor- 
pora qu8B Soli propiora : ea ratione constabit optime pondera Planeta- 
rum omnium esse inter se ut vires." " The bodies of Venus and Mer- 
cuiy are more ripened and condensed on account of the greater heat 
of the Sun. The more remote planets, by want of heat, are deficient 
in those metallic substances and weighty minerals with which the Earth 
abounds. Bodies are denser in proportion to their nearness to the Sun , 
from which reason it will easily appear that the weight c fall planets is 
in proportion to their forces." 



THE PLANETS. 



121 



Planets. 


Periods of sidereal 
Revolutions, 


Rotation. 




87'i-96928 

224-70078 

365-25637 

686-97964 

4332-58480 

10759-21981 

30686-82051 

60126-70000 


d. h. m. 8. 

23 56 4 

1 37 20 
9 55 27 
10 29 17 




Earth 


Mars 


Jupiter .............. 


Saturn ............... 


Uranus ... .... .... .... 


Neptune ... ........ 





lyh. 


30"&gt; 


41 


20 


2 


7 


23 


16 


32 


19 


41 


36 


17 









In another more perspicuous form the two periods of revo- 
lution are : 

Mercuiy 87'^- 23'^- 15"^ 47"- 

Venus 224 16 49 7 

Earth 365 ' 6 9 10 -7496 

whence it follows that the period of the tropical revolution, 
or the length of the solar year, is 365''-24222, or 365d. 5h. 
48m. 47"* 80 91 ; the length of the solar year is shortened 
0"'595 in 100 years' on account of the precession of the equi- 
noxes : 

Mars 1 year, 321'^- 

Jupiter 11 years, 314 

Saturn 29 years, 166 

Uranus 84 years, 5 

Neptune 164 years, 225 

The rotation is most rapid in the case of the exterior planets, 
which have, at the same time, a longer period of revolution ; 
slower in the case of the smaller interior planets, which are 
nearer to the Sun. The periods of revolution of the asteroids 
between Mars and Jupiter are very various, and will be spoken 
of in the enumeration of the individual planets. It is there- 
fore sufficient, in this place, to give a comparative result, and 
to observe that among the small planets Hygeia has the lon- 
gest, and Flora the shortest period of revolution. 

8. Inclination of the Planetary Orbits and Axes of Ro- 
tation. — Next to the masses of the planets, the inclination 
and eccentricity of their orbits are among the most important 
elements upon which the disturbances depend. The compar- 
ison of these, in the order of succession of the interior, small 
intermediate and exterior planets (from Mercury to Mars, from 
Flora to Hygeia, from Jupiter to Neptune), presents manifold 
similarities and contrasts, which lead to considerations as to 
the formation of these cosmical bodies, and their changes dur 

Vol. IV.— F 



122 



COSMOS. 



ing long periods of time. The planets revolving in such va- 
rious elliptical orbits are also all situated in diflerent planes. 
In order to render a numerical comparison possible, they are 
reduced to a fundamental plane, either fixed or movable, ac- 
cording to certain laws. As such, the most convenient is the 
ecliptic — the course which the Earth actually traverses — or 
the equator of the terrestrial spheroid. "We add to the same 
table the inclinations of the axes of rotation of the planets 
toward their own orbits, so far as they are determined with 
any certainty. 



Planets. 


Inclination of the 
Planetary Orbits 
to the Ecliptic. 


Inclination of the 
Planetary Orbits 
to the Earth's 
Equator. 


Inclination of the 
axes of the Plan- 
ets to their Orb- 
its. 


Mercury 

Venus ...... 


7° 0' 5"-9 
3° 23' 28"'5 
0° 0' 0" 
1° 51' 6"-2 
1° 18' 51"-6 
2° 29' 35"-9 
0° 46' 28"'0 
lo 47/ 0" 


28° 45' 8" 
24° 33' 21" 
230 27' 54"-8 
240 44' 24" 
23° 18' 28" 
22° 38' 14" 
23° 41' 24" 
22° 21' 0" 


66° 32' 
61° 18' 
86° 54' 


Earth 


Mars 


Jupiter . 


Saturn 


Uranus 


Neptune 



The small planets are omitted here, because they will be 
treated of further on as a separate distinct group. If thd 
planet Mercury, situated near the Sun, and the inclination 
of whose axis toward the ecliptic (7° 0' 5"* 9) approaches 
very near to that of the solar equator (7° 30'), the inclinations 
of the other seven planets will be seen to oscillate between 
0|° and 3|-°. Jupiter exhibits, in the position of the axis of 
rotation with reference to its own orbit, the closest approxi- 
mation to the extreme of perpendicularity. On the contrary, 
the axis of rotation of Uranus, to conclude from the inclina- 
tion of the orbits of its satellites, very nearly coincides with 
the plane of the planet's orbit. 

Since the division and duration of the seasons, the solar al- 
titudes under various latitudes, and the length of the days, 
depend upon the amount of the inclination of the Earth's axis 
toward the plane of its orbit, as well as upon the obliquity of 
the ecliptic {i.e., upon the angle which the apparent course 
of the Sun makes with the equator at their point of intersec- 
tion), this element is of the most extreme importance as re- 
gards the astronomical climate, i.e., the temperature of the 
Earth, in as far as this is a function of the meridian altitude 
attained by the Sun and the duration of its continuance above 
the horizon. If the obliquity of the ecliptic were great, or 



THE PLANETS. 123 

if, indeed, the Earth's equator were perpendicular to the 
Earth's orbit, at each part of its surface, even under the 
poles, the Sun would be in the zenith once in the year, and 
for a greater or less time, neither rise nor set. The differ- 
ences of summer and winter under each latitude (as well as 
the length of the day) would obtain the maximum of opposi- 
tion. The climates in each part of the Earth would belong, 
in the highest degree, to those which are called extreme, and 
which an interminably complicated series of rapidly-changing 
currents of air could only slightly equalize. If the reverse 
were the case, or the obliquity of the ecliptic null, if the 
Earth's equator coincided with the ecliptic, the differences of 
the seasons and in the length of the days would cease every 
where, because the Sun would continually appear to move in 
the equator. The inhabitants of the poles would see it per- 
petually at the horizon. " The mean annual temperature of 
each point of the Earth's surface would also be that of each 
individual day."^ This condition has been called an eternal 
spring, although, however, only on account of the universally 
equal length of the days and nights. As the growth of 
plants would be deprived of the stimulating action of the 
Sun's heat, a great part of those districts which we now call 
temperate zones would be reduced to the almost always uni- 
form and not very agreeable spring climate, from which I 
suffered much under the equator, upon the barren mountain 
plains (Paramosf) between 10,659 and 12,837 feet above the 
level of the sea, situated near the boundary of perpetual snow 
in the Andes chain. The temperature of the air during the 
day oscillates there between 4^° and 9° Reaum. (42° and 
520-25 Fahr.). 

Grecian antiquity was much occupied with the obliquity 
of the ecliptic, with rough measurements, conjectures as to its 
variability, and the influence of the inclination of the Earth's 
axis upon climate, and the luxuriance of organic development. 
These speculations belonged especially to Anaxagoras, the 
Pythagorean school, and to (Enopides of Chios. The pas- 
sages which give us any information on this point are scanty 
and indecisive ; however, they show that the development of 
organic life and the origin of animals were considered to have 
been simultaneous with the epoch in which the axis of the 
Earth first commenced to be inclined, which also altered thg 

* Madler, Astronomic, § 193. 

t Humboldt, De Distributione GeograpTiica Plantarum,^. 104. ( View$ 
cf Nature, p. 220 to 223, Bohn's edition.) 



124 COSMOS. 

inhabitability of the planet in particular zones. According 
to Plutarch, De Plac. Philos., ii., 8, Anaxagoras believed 
•' that the world, after it had come into existence and pro* 
duced from its womb living beings, had of itself inclined to- 
ward the south." In the same regard, Diogenes Laertius 
says of the Clazomenier, " the stars had originally projected 
themselves in a dome-like layer, so that the pole appearing 
at any time was vertically over the Earth ; but that after- 
ward they assumed an oblique direction." The origin of the 
obliquity of the ecliptic was considered as a cosmical event. 
There was no question respecting a subsequent progressive 
alteration. 

The description of the two extreme, therefore opposite, con 
ditions to which the planets Uranus and Jupiter approximate 
most closely, is suited to call to mind the variations which the 
increasing or decreasing obliquity of the ecliptic would pro- 
duce in the meteorological relations of our planet, if these va- 
riations were not comprised within very narrow limits. The 
knowledge of these limits, the subject of the great works of 
Leonhard Euler, Lagrange, and Laplace, may be called one 
of the most brilliant achievements of modern times in theo- 
retical astronomy and the perfected higher analysis. These 
limits are so narrow, that Laplace {Expos, du Systeme du 
Monde, ed. 1824, p. 303) puts forward the opinion that the 
obhquity of the ecliptic oscillates about its mean position only 
1^° toward both sides. According to this statement,^ the 
tropical zone (the tropic of Cancer, as its northernmost and 
outermost boundary) would approach only so much nearer to 
us. The result would therefore be, if the numerous other 
meteorological perturbations are omitted, as if Berlin were 
gradually displaced from it present isothermal line to that 
of Prague. The elevation of the mean annual temperature 
would scarcely amount to more than one degree of the cen- 
tigrade {j\ of a degree of Fahrenheit's) thermometer.! Biot, 

* " L'etendue entiere de cette variation serait d'environ 12 dcgres, 
mais I'action du Soleil et de la Lune la reduit k peu pres k trois degr^s 
(ceut^simaux)." " The entire extent of that variation would be about 
12^, but the action of the Sun and Moon reduce it to very nearly 3*^ 
(centesimal)." — Laplace, Expos, du Syst. du Monde, p. 303. 

t I have shown in another place, by comparison of numerous mean 
annual temperatures, that in Europe, from the North Cape to Palermo, 
the difference of one degree of geographical latitude very nearly cor- 
responds to 0-5° of the centigrade thermometer, but in the western 
temperature-system of America (between Boston and Charlestown) to 
0-9O. {Asie Centrale, tom. iii., p. 229.) 



THE PLANETS. 125 

indeed, also assumes only narrow limits for the alternating 
variation in the obliquity of the ecliptic, but considers it 
more advisable not to assign to it a determinate number. 
" La diminution lente et seculaire de I'obliquite de I'eclip- 
tique," says he, " ofire des etats alternatifs qui produisent 
une oscillation eternelle, comprise entre dea limites fixes. La 
theorie n'a pas encore pu parvenir a determiner cea limites ; 
inais d'apres la constitution du systeme planetaire, elle a de- 
montre qu'elles existent et qu'elles sent tres 2^€U etendues 
Ainsi, a ne considerer que le seul effet des causes constantes 
qui agissent actuellement sur le systeme du monde, on peut 
affirmer que le plan de I'ecliptique n^ a jamais coincide et ne 
coincidera jamais avec le plan de I'equateur, phenomene qui, 
s'il arrivait, produirait sur le Terre le (pretendu !) printemps 
perpetuel."=^ — Biot, Traite d' Astronomic Physique, 3d ed., 
1847, tom. iv., p. 91. 

While the nutation of the Earth's axis discovered by Brad- 
ley depends merely upon the influence of the Sun and the 
Earth's satellite upon the oblate figure of our planet, the in- 
crease and decrease in the obliquity of the ecliptic is the con- 
sequence of the variable position of all the planets. At the 
present time, these are so situated that their united influence 
upon the Earth's orbit produces a diminution in the obliquity 
of the ecliptic. This obliquity amounts, according to Bessel, 
to 0"-457 annually. At the end of many thousand years, the 
situation of the planetary orbits and their nodes (their points 
of intersection with the ecliptic) will be so different, that the 
advance of the equinoxes will be converted into a retrogres- 
sion, and consequently an increase in the obliquity of the eclip- 
tic. Theory teaches us that these increases and diminutions 
occupy periods of very unequal duration. The most ancient 
astronomical observations which have come down to us, with 
accurate numerical data, reach back to the year 1104 before 
Christ, and testify to the extreme antiquity of Chinese civil- 
ization. The literary remains are scarcely a century more 

* "The slight and secular variation of the obliqaity of the ecliptic 
presents alternating states, which produce an eternal oscillation com- 
prised within fixed limits. Theory has not been able to determine 
those limits ; but, according to the constitution of the planetary system, 
it has been proved that they exist, and that they are of very slight ex* 
tent. Thus, to consider only the effect of the permanent causes which 
act upon the system of the world, it may be affirmed that the plane of 
the ecliptic never has and never icill coincide with the plane of the 
equator, a phenomenon which, if it took place, would produce upon the 
Earth the (pretended !) eternal spring. 



12C COSMOS. 

recent, and a regulated calculation of time extends (accord- 
ing to Edward Biot) as far back as 2700 years before Christ.* 
Under the reign of Tscheu-Kung, the brother of Wu-Wang, 
the meridian shadows were measured in two solstices, upon 
an eight-foot gnomon, in the town of Layang, south of the 
Yellow River (the town is now called Ho-nan-fu, and is in 
the province of Ho-nan), in a latitude of 34° 46'. f These 
measurements gave the obliquity of the ecliptic as 23° 54' ; 
that is, 27' greater than it was in 1850. The observations 
of Pytheas and Eratosthenes at Marseilles and Alexandria are 
six and seven centuries later. We possess the results of four 
observations of the obliquity of the ecliptic previous to our era, 
and seven subsequent, up to Ulugh Beg's observations at the 
observatory of Samarcand. The theory of Laplace corresponds 
sometimes in plus, sometimes in minus, in an admirable man- 
ner with the observations made during a period of nearly 3000 
years. The knowledge transmitted to us of Tscheu-Kung's 
measurement cf the shadow-length is so much the more for- 
tunate, as the manuscript which mentions it escaped, from 
some unknown cause, the fanatical destruction of books com- 
manded by the Emperor Schi-hoang-ti of the Tsin dynasty, in 
the year 246 before Christ. Since the commencement of the 
fourth Egyptian dynasty with the Kings Chufu, Schafra, and 
Menkera — the builders of the Pyramids — falls, according to 
Lepsius, twenty-three centuries before the solstitial observa- 
tion at Layang, it is indeed very probable, from the high de- 
gree of civilization of the Egyptian people and their early 
regulation of a calendar, that even at that time the length 
of shadows had been measured in the valley of the Nile ; but 
no knowledge of this has come down to us. Even the Peru- 
vians, although less advanced in the perfection of calendars 
and intercalations than the Muyscas (mountain inhabitants 
of New Granada) and the Mexicans were, possessed gno- 
mons, surrounded by a circle marked upon a very level sur- 
face. They stood in several parts of the empire, as well as 
in the great temple of the Sun at Cuzco ; the gnomon at 
Q/Uito, situated almost under the equator, was held in great- 
er veneration than the others, and crowned with flowers upon 
the equinoctial feasts. $ 

* Cosmos, vol. ii., p. 114, 115, and notes. 

t Laplace, Expos, du Systeme du Monde, 5th ed., p. 303, 345, 403, 
406, and 408 ; the same in the Connaissance des Temps for 1811, p. 386 
Biot, Traits Elem. d'Astron. Physique, torn, i., p. 61 ; torn, iv., p. 90-99 
and 614-623. 

X Garcilaso, Comment. Reales, part i. lib. ii., cap. 22-25 ; Prescott 



THE PLANETS. 127 

9. Eccentricity of the Planetary Orbits. — The form of 
the elliptical orbits is determined by the greater or less dis- 
tance of the two foci from the center of the ellipse. This 
distance, or the eccentricity of the planetary orbits expressed 
in fractional parts of their half major axes, varies from 0006 
in the orbit of Venus (consequently very near the circular 
form), and 0-076 in that of Ceres, to 0205 and 0255 in 
those of Mercury and Juno. Next in succession to the least 
eccentric orbits of Venus and Neptune follows that of the 
Earth, whose eccentricity is now decreasing at the rate of 
about 0-00004299 in 100 years, while the minor axis in- 
creases ; then come the orbits of Uranus, Jupiter, Saturn, 
Ceres, Egeria, Vesta, and Mars. The most eccentric orbits 
are those of Juno (0-255), Pallas (0-239), Iris (0-232), Vic- 
toria (0-217), Mercury (0-205), and Hebe (0-202). The ec- 
centricity is on the increase in the orbits of some planets, as 
Mercury, Mars, and Jupiter ; on the decrease in those of 
others, as Venus, the Earth, Saturn, and Uranus. The fol 
lowing table gives the eccentricities of the large planets for 
the year 1800, according to Hansen. The eccentricities of 
the fourteen small planets will be given subsequently, to- 
gether with other elements of their orbits for the middle of 
the nineteenth century. 

Hist, of the Conquest of Peru, vol, i., p. 126. The Mexicans possessed 
among their twenty hieroglyphical signs of the days, one held in espe- 
cial veneration, called OllintonatiuTi, that of the four movements of the 
Sun, which governed the great cycle, renewed every 52=:r4 X 13 years, 
and referred to the course of the Sun intersecting the solstices and equi- 
noxes, and hieroglyphically expressed hy foot-steps. In the beautiful- 
ly-painted illuminated Aztec manuscript, which was formerly preserved 
in the villa of Cardinal Borgia at Veletri, and from which I derived 
much important information, there is the remarkable astrological sign 
of a cross. The day-signs, which are written on the margin by its side, 
would perfectly represent the passage of the Sun through the zenith of 
the town of Mexico (Tenochtitlan), the equator, and the solstitial points, 
if the points (round disks), added to the day-signs on account of the 
periodic series, were equally complete in all three passages of the Sun. 
(Humboldt, Vues des Cordiliires, pi. xxxvii., No. 8, p. 164, 189, and 237.) 
The King of Tezcuco, Nezahualpilli (called a fast child, because his fa- 
ther fasted for a long time previously to the birth of the wished-for 
son), who was passionately given to astronomical observations, erected 
a building which Torquemada rather ventui'ously calls an observatory, 
and the ruins of which he saw. (Monarquia Indiana, lib. ii., cap, 64.) 
In the Raccolta di Mendoza, we find a priest represented ( Vuet de» 
Cordilleres, pi. Iviii., No. 8, p. 289), who is watching the stars, which 
is expressed by a dotted line which passes from the observed star to hia 
eye. 



12S COSMOS. 



Mercury 0-2056163 

Venus 0-0068618 

Earth 0-0167922 

Mars 0-0932166 



Jupitei 0-0481621 

Saturn 0-0561505 

Uranus 0-0466108 

Neptune 0-00871946 



The motion of the major axis {line of apsides) of the 
planetary orbits, by which the place of the perihelion is 
changed, is a motion which goes on perpetually in one di- 
rection, and proportionally to the time. It is a change in 
the position of the major axis, which requires more than a 
hundred thousand years to complete its cycle, and is to be 
distinguished as essentially different from those alterations 
which the planetary orbits undergo in their ybrm — their el- 
lipticity. The question has been raised as to whether the 
increasing value of this ellipticity is capable, during thou- 
sands of years, of modifying, to any considerable extent, the 
temperature of the Earth, in reference to the daily and an- 
nual quantity and distribution of heat ? Whether a partial 
solution of the great geological problem of the imbedding of 
tropical vegetable and animal remains in the now cold zones 
may not be found, in these astronomical causes, proceeding 
regularly in accordance with eternal laws ? The same 
mathematical arguments which excite apprehensions as to 
the position of the apsides, the form of the elliptical planet 
ary orbits (according as these approach the circular form oi 
a cometary eccentricity), as to the inclination of the planet- 
ary axes, changes in the obliquity of the ecliptic, the influ- 
ence of precession upon the length of the year, also afford, 
in their higher analytical development, cosmical grounds for 
reassurance. The major axes and the masses are constant. 
Periodic recurrence hinders the unlimited augmentation 
of certain perturbations. In consequence of the mutual, and, 
at the same time, compensating influence of Jupiter and Sat- 
urn, the eccentricities of their orbits, in themselves slight, 
are alternately in a state of increase and decrease, and are 
also comprised within fixed, and, for the most part, narrow 
limits. 

The point in which the Earth is nearest to the Sun falls in 
very different periods of the year, in consequence of the al- 
teration in the position of the major axis.=^ If the perihelion 
falls at the present time on the first day of January, and the 

* John Herschol, on the Astronomical Causes which may injluenc9 
Geological Phenomena, iu the Transact, of the Gcolog. Soc. of London 
2d series, vol. iii., pi. i., p. 298; the same in lii? Treatise on Astnmomy 
1833. (Cab. Cyclop., vol. xliii., $ SIS.') 



THE PLANETS. 129 

aphelion six months afterward, upon the first day of July, it 
may happen, on account of the advance (turm7ig) of the 
major axis of the Earth's orbit, that the minimum may oc- 
cur m summer and the maximum in winter, so that in Jan- 
uary the Earth would be farther from the Sun than in the 
summer by about 2,800,000 geographical miles {i. e., about 
3'^th of the mean distance of the Earth from the Sun). It 
might, at the first glance, be supposed that the occurrence 
of the perihelion at an opposite time of the year (instead of 
the winter, as is now the case, in summer) must necessarily 
produce great climatic variations ; but, on the above suppo- 
sition, the Sun will no longer remain seven days longer in 
the northern hemisphere ; no longer, as is now the case, 
traverse that part of the ecliptic from the autumnal equinox 
to the vernal equinox, in a space of time which is one week 
shorter than that in which it traverses the other half of its 
orbit from the vernal to the autumnal equinox. The differ- 
ence of temperature which is considered as the consequence 
to be apprehended from the turning of the major axis (and 
we refer here merely to the astronomical climates, excluding 
all considerations as to the relations of the solid and liquid 
portion of ihe many-formed surface of the Earth) will, on the 
whole, disappear,^ principally from the circumstance that 
the point of our planet's orbit in which it is nearest to the 
Sun is at the same time always that over which it passes 
with the greatest velocity. The reassuring solution of this 
problem is to a certain extent contained in the beautiful law 
first pointed out by Lambert,! according to which the quan- 
tity of heat which the Earth receives from the Sun in each 
part of the year is proportional to the angle which the radius 
vector of the Sun describes during the same period. 

* Arago, in the Annuaire for 1834, p. 199. 

t " II s'ensuit (du theoreme dA k Lambert) que la quantite de cha 
leur envoyee par le Soleil k la Terre est la merae en allant de r6qui 
noxe du prin temps k I'equinoxe d'automne qu'en revenant de celui-ci au 
premier. Le temps plus long que le Soleil emploie dans le premier 
trajet, est exactement compense par son eloignementaussiplus grand; 
et les qnantites de chaleur qu'il envoie k la Terre, sont les m^mes pen 
dant qu'il se trouv»dans I'un ou I'autre hemisphere, boreal ou austral." 
— Poisson, Sur la StabiliiS du Systeme Planitaire, Connaissance des 
2'emps for 1836, p. 54. " It follows, from the theorem of Lambert, that 
tl:3 quantity of heat which is conveyed by the Sun to the Earth is the 
same during the passage from the vernal to the autumnal equinox as in 
returning from the latter to the former. The much longer time which 
the Sun takes in the first part of its course is exactly compensated by 
its proportionately greater distance, and the quantities of heat which 

F 2 



130 COSMOS. 

As the altered position of the major axis is capable of ex- 
erting only a very slight influence upon the temperature of 
the Earth, so likewise the limits of the probable changes in 
the elliptical form of the Earth's orbit are, according to Arago 
and Poisson,* so narrow that these changes could only very 
slightly modify the climates of the individual zones, and that 
in very long periods. Although the analyses which determ- 
ine these limits accurately is not yet quite completed, still so 
much, at least, follows from it, that the eccentricity of the 
Earth's orbit will never equal those of the orbits of Juno, 
Pallas, and Victoria. 

10. hitensity of the Light of the Sun upon the Planets. 
— If the intensity of light upon the Earth is taken as =1, 
it will be found to be upon the other planets as follows • 



Mercury .... 6-674 

Venus 1-911 

Mars 0-431 

Pallas 0-130 



Jupiter 0-036 

Saturn 0-011 

Uranus 003 

Neptune . . . 0-001 

In consequence of the very great eccentricity of their orb- 
its, the intensity of light on the following planets varies in 

Mercury, in perihelion, 10-58 ; in aphelion, 4-59 ; 

Mars " " 0-52; " " 0-36; 

Juno " " 0-25; " " 009; 

while the Earth, owing to the slight eccentricity of its orbits, 
has in perihelion 1-034, and in aphelion 0-967. If the sun 
light upon Mercury is seven times more intense than upon the 
Earth, it must also be 368 times more feeble upon Uranus. 
The relations of heat have not been mentioned here, because 
they are complicated phenomena, dependent upon the exist- 
ence or non-existence of an atmosphere surrounding the plan- 
it conveys to the Earth are the same while in the one hemisphere or 
the other, north or south." 

* Arago, op. cit., p. 300-204. " L'excentricite," says Poisson {op. 
cit., p. 38 and 52), "ayant toujours ete et devant toujours demeurer 
tres petite, I'influence des variations seculaires de la quantite de chaleur 
solaire re^ue par la'Terre sur la temperature moyenne parait aussi de- 
voir dtre tres limitee. On ne saurait admettre que l'excentricite de la 
Terre, qui est actuellement environ un soixantieme, ait jamais et6 ou 
devienne jamais un quart, comme celle de Junon ou de Pallas." "As 
the eccentricity alw^ays has been, and always will be, very small, the 
influence of the secular variations of the quantity of solar heat received 
by the Earth upon the mean temperature would appear also to be very 
limited. It can not be admitted that the eccentricity of the Earth, 
which is actually about ^^, has ever been, or ever will be \, as that 
of Juno or Pallas." 



THE PLANETS. 131^ 

ets, its constitution, and height. I will merely call to mind 
here the conjecture of Sir John Herschel, as to the temper- 
ature of the Moon's surface, " which must necessarily be very 
much heated — possibly to a degree much exceeding that cf 
boiling water." ^ 

b. SECONDARY PLANETS. 

The general cmnparative considerations relating to the 
secondary planets have already been 'given with some com- 
pleteness in the delineations of nature {Cosmos, vol. i., p. 
94-98). At that time (March, 1845) there were only 11 
principal and 18 secondary planets known. Of the asteroids 
so called telescopic, or small planets, only four were discov 
ered : Ceres, Pallas, Juno, and Yesta. At the present time 
(August, 18-51), the number oi the principal planets exceeds 
that of the satellites. We are acquainted with 22 of the for 
mer and 21 of the latter. After an intermission of thirty- 
eight years in planetary discoveries (from 1807, to December, 
1845), commenced a long series of ten new small planets, 
with Astrea, discovered by Hencke. Of these, two (Astrea 
and Hebe) were first detected by Hencke at Dries©n, four 
(Iris, Flora, Victoria, and Irene) by Hind in London, one (Me- 
tis) by Graham at Markree Castle, and three (Hygeia, Par- 
thenope, and Egeria) by De Gasparis at Naples. The dis- 
covery of the outermost of all the large planets, Neptune, an- 
nounced by Leverrier, and fpund by Galle at Berlin, followed 
ten months after Astrea. The discoveries now accumulate 
with such rapidity, that the topography of the solar regions 
appears, after the lapse of a few years, quite as antiquated as 
statistical descriptions of countries. 

Of the 21 satellites now known, one belongs to the Earth, 
four to Jupiter, eight to Saturn (the last discovered of these 
eight is, according to distance, the seventh, Hyperion ; discov- 
ered in two different places at the same time by Bond and 
Lassell), six to Uranus (of which the second and fourth are 
most positively determined), and two to JNTeptune. 

The satellites revolving round the principal planets con- 
stitute subordinate systems, in which the principal planets 
take the place of central bodies, forming individual regions 
of very different dimensions, in which the great solar region 
is, as it were, repeated in miniature. According to our pres- 
ent knowledge, the region of Jupiter is 208,000 geographical 
miles in diameter, and that of Saturn 4,200,000. In Galileo's 
* Outlines, $ 432. 



Jil32 COSMOS. 

time, when the expression of a small Jovial world {Mundus 
Jovialis) was frequently made use of, these analogies between 
the subordinate systems and the solar system contributed 
much to the more rapid and general diffusion of the Coper- 
nican system of the world. They suggest the repetitions of 
form and position which is so frequently presented by organic 
nature in subordinate spheres. 

The distribution of the satellites in the solar regions is so 
unequal, that while the proportion of the moonless principal 
planets to those which ,are accompanied by Moons is as 3 to 
5, the latter belong, with the single exception of one, the 
Earth, to the exterior planetary groups, situated beyond the 
ring of the asteroids with interlacing orbits. The only satel 
lite which has been formed in the group of interior planets 
between the Sun and the asteroids, the Earth's Moon, has 
a remarkably large diameter in proportion to that of its pri- 
mary. This proportion is g'.g- ; while the largest of Saturn's 
satellites (the sixth. Titan) is perhaps only y^.j , and the larg- 
est of Jupiter's satellites, the third, ^ j.-g of the diameter of 
their primaries. A wide distinction must be drawn between 
this consideration of a relative magnitude and that of an ab- 
solute magnitude. The Earth's Moon, relatively so large 
(1816 miles in diameter), is absolutely smaller than all four 
of Jupiter's satellites (3104, 2654, 2116, and 1900 miles in 
diameter). The sixth satellite of Saturn differs very little in 
magnitude from Mars (3568 miles).* If the problem of tel- 
escopic visibility depended only upon the diameter, and was 
not, at the same time, determined by the proximity of the 
disks of the primaries, the great distance and the nature of 
the reflecting surfaces, it would be necessary to consider as 
the smallest of the secondary planets the first and second of 
Saturn's satellites (Mimas and Enceladus), and the two satel- 
lites of Uranus ; but it is safer to represent them merely as 
the smallest luminous points. It has hitherto appeared more 
certain fhat, upon the whole, the smallest of all planetary 
bodies (primaries and satellites) are to be found among the 
small planets. t 

The density of the satellites is by no means always less 
than that of their primaries, as is the case with the Earth's 
Moon (whose density is only 0619 of that of our Earth) and 

* Outlines, $ 548. 

t See Madler's attempt to estimate the diameter ofVesta (264 geo 
graphical miles) with a thousand-fold magnifying power in His Attrc 
wmie, p. 218. 



THE PLANETS. 



13^ 



the third satellite of Jupiter. The densest of this group of 
satellites, the second, is even denser than Jupiter himself, 
while the third and largest appears to be oi equal density 
with the primary. The masses also do not increase in at all 
the same ratio as the distances. ' If the planets have been 
formed from revolving rings, then the greater or less dense 
aggregation round a nucleus must have been caused by pe- 
cuUar causes, which may, perhaps, always remain unknown 
to us. 

The orbits of the secondary planets which belong to the 
same group have very different degrees of eccentricity. In 
the Jovial system, the orbits of the first and second satellites 
are nearly circular, while the eccentricities of those of the 
third and fourth satellites amount to 0*0013 and 00072. In 
the Saturnian system, the orbit of the satellite nearest to the 
primary (Mimas) is considerably more eccentric than the orb- 
its of Enceladus and Titan, the largest and first discovered, 
whose orbit was so accurately determined by Bessel. The 
eccentricity of the orbit of the sixth satellite of Saturn is only 
0-02922. According to all these data, which are among those 
that may be relied upon, Mimas only is more eccentric than 
the Earth's Moon (0-05484) ; the latter possesses the pecul- 
iarity that its orbit round the Earth has a greater eccentric- 
ity, in comparison with that of its primary, than any other 
satellite. Mimas revolves round Saturn in an orbit whose 
eccentricity is 0-068, while that of the orbit of its primary is 
0-056 ; but the orbit of our Moon has an eccentricity of 0-054. 
while the eccentricity of that of the Earth is only 0-016. With 
regard to the distances of the satellites from their primaries, 
compare Cosmos, vol. i., p. 94-98. The distance of the sat- 
ellite nearest to Saturn (Mimas) is now no longer taken as 
80,088 geographical miles, but as 102,400 ; whence its dis- 
tance from the ring, this being calculated as 24,188 miles 
broad, and at a distance of 18,376 miles from the surface of 
the planet, will be 28,000 miles. ^ Remarkable anomalies, 
together with a certain correspondence, are also presented in 
the position of the orbits of the satellites in the Jovial sys- 
tem, in which very nearly all the satellites move in the plane 
of the equator of their primary. In the group of Saturnian 
satellites, seven of them revolve almost in the plane of the 
ring, while the outermost (the eighth, Japetus) is inclined to- 
ward their plane 12° 14'. 

* In the earlier data (Cosmos, vol. i., p . 97) the equatorial rliametei 
was taken as a basis. 



^34 COSMOS. 

In this general consideration of the planetary revolutions 
in the universe, we have descended from the higher — though 
probably not the highest* system — from that of the Sun to 
the subordinate partial systems of Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, 
and Neptune. In the same way that, from the striving to- 
ward generalization of views, which is innate in thoughtful, 
and, at the same time, imaginative men, the unsatisfied cos- 
mical presentiment of a translatory motionf of our solar sys- 
tem through space appears to suggest the idea of a higher 
relation and subordination, so the possibility has been con- 
ceived that the satellites of Jupiter may be again central 
bodies to other secondary ones, which, on account of their 
smallness, are unseen. In that case, the individual mem 
bers of the partial systems, which are chiefly situated among 
the group of exterior principal planets, would have other and 
similar partial systems subordinate to them. Repetitions of 
form in recurring organizations, as well as the self-created 
images of the fancy, are certainly pleasing to a systematic 
mind ; but in every serious investigation, it is imperatively 
necessary to distinguish between the ideal and the actual 
Cosmos — between the possible, and that which has been dis- 
covered by actual observation. 



SPECIAL ENUMERATION OF THE PLANETS AND THEIR MOONS, AS 
PARTS OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM. 

It is, as I have already often remarked, the especial object 
of a physical description of the ivorld to bring together all 
the important and well-established numerical results which 
have been obtained in the domain either of sidereal or ter 
restrial phenomena up to the middle of the nineteenth cen 
tury. All that has form and motion should here be repre 
sented as something already created, existing, and definite 
The grounds upon which the obtained numerical results ai 
founded ; the cosmological conjectures respecting genetic de 
velopment, which during thousands of years have been called 
into existence by the ever-changing conditions of mechanical 
and physical knowledge — these do not, in the strictest sense 
of the word, come within the range of empirical investiga- 
tion. {Cosmos, vol. i., p. 47-49, 71, and 83.) 

* Compare Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 196. 

t I have fully treated of the translatory motion of the Sun in the de- 
lineation of nature. {Cosmos, vol. i., p. 145-149. Compare also voL 
iii., p. 184.) 



THE SUN. 



The Sun. 



13# 



Whatever relates to the dimensions, or to the present views 
as to the physical constitution of the central body, has been 
already given, [Cosmos, vol. iv., p. 59-88.) It only re- 
mains to add in this place some remarks, according to the 
most recent observations, upon the red figures and masses 
of red clouds, which were specially treated of at page 70. 
The important phenomena which the total eclipse of the Sun 
of July 28, 1851, presented in Eastern Europe, have still 
more strengthened the opinion put forward by Arago in 1842, 
that the red mountain, or cloud-like 'projectio7is upon the edge 
of the eclipsed Sun, belong to the outermost gaseous envelope 
of the central body.^ These projections became visible on the 
Moon's western edge as it proceeded in its motion toward the 
east {Annuaire du Bureau des Longitudes for 1842, p. 457), 
and disappeared again when they were covered on the oppo- 
site by the eastern edge of the Moon. 

On a subsequent occasion, the intensity of the light of these 
projections became so considerable, that they could be per- 
ceived within the corona through telescopes, when veiled by 
^heir clouds, and even with the naked eye. 

The form of some of the projections, which were mostly 
Yuby or peach-colored, changed with perceptible rapidity dur- 
ing the total obscuration ; one of these projections appeared to 
be curved at its summit, and presented to many observers the 
appearance of a freely-suspended detached cloud\ near the 
point, and resembling a column of smoke curved back at the 
top. The height of most of these projections was estimated 
at from 1' to 2' ; at one point it is said to have been more 
Besides these tap-formed projections, from three to five of 
which were counted, there were also observed ribbon-like 
streaks of a carmine color, extended lengthways, which ap- 
peared to rest upon the Moon, and were often serrated 4 

* Cosmos, vol. iv,, p. 70, note % and $, and p. 79. 

t Compare the observations of the Swedish mathematician, Bigerus 
Vassenius, at Gottenburg, during the total eclipse of May 2, 1733, and 
the commentary upon them by Arago, in the Annuaire du Bureau des 
Longitudes for 1846, p. 441 and 462. Dr. Galle, v^rho observed on the 
28th of July at Frauenburg, saw " the freely-suspended cloud connect- 
ed with the curved, hook-formed gibbosity by three or more threads." 

t Compare what a very expert observer. Captain Berard, saw at Tou- 
lon upon the 8th of July, 1842. " II vit une bande rouge tres mince 
dentelee irr^guli^rement." {Annuaire du Bureau des Longitudes, p 
416.) " He saw a very narrow red band irregularly serrated." 



^136 COSMOS. 

That part of the Moon's edge which was not projected 
upon the Sun's disk again . became perceptibxe, especially 
during the egress.* 

A group of Sun-spots was visible, though some minutes 
distant from the edge of the Sun, where the largest red, 
hook-formed projection was developed. On the opposite side, 
not far from the feeble eastern projection, there was also a 
Sun-spot near the edge. It is scarcely possible that these 
funnel-shaped depressions can have furnished the material 
constituting the red gaseous exhalations, on account of the 
distance above mentioned ; but as the whole surface of the 
Sun appears to be covered with pores, perhaps the most 
probable conjecture is, that the same emanation of vapor and 
gas, which, rising from the body of the Sun, forms the fun- 
nels,! pours through these, which appear to us as Sun-spots 

* This outline of the Moon, clearly perceived by four observers dur 
ing the total eclipse of the Sun on the 8th of July, 1842, was never pre- 
viously described as having been seen during similar eclipses. The 
possibility of seeing an exterior outline appears to depend upon the 
light which is given by the third outermost envelope of the Sun and 
the ring of light (corona). " La Lune se projette en partie sur I'atmo- 
sphere du Soleil. Dans la portion de la lunette ou I'image de la Lune 
se forme, il n'y a que la lumiere provenant de I'atmosphere terrestre. 
La Lune ue fournit I'ien de sensible, et, semblable k un ecran, elle ar- 
rete tout ce qui provient de plus loin et lui correspond. En dehors de 
cette image, et preeisement k partir de son bord, le champ est eclaire 
a la fois par la lumidre de I'atmosphere terrestre et par la lumiire de 
V atmosphere solaire. Supposons que ces deux lumieres reunies ferment 
un total plus fort de ^ que la lumiere atmospherique terrestre, et, des 
ce moment, le bord de la Lune sera visible. Ce genre de vision pent 
prendre le nom de vision negative; c'est en effet par une moindre intensity 
de la portion du champ de la lunette ou existe I'image de la Lune, que le 
contour de cette image est aper9U. Si I'image etait plus intense que le 
reste du champ, la vision serait positive." — Arago, Annuaire du Bureau 
des Longitudes, p. 384. " The Moon is projected partially upon the at- 
mosphere of the Sun. In that portion of the telescope where the image 
of the Moon is formed, no other light enters except that of the terres- 
trial atmosphere. The Moon gives no sensible light, and, like a screen, 
it stops all that which comes frortj^ beyond and corresponds with it. 
Outside the image, and immediately round its edge, the field is lighted 
simultaneously by the light of the terrestrial atmosphere and by that of 
the solar atmosphere. If we suppose that these two lights collectively 
are -^-^ stronger than the light of the terrestrial atmosphere, the Moon's 
edge will be directly visible. This kind of vision may be designated 
a negative vision, for it is, in fact, by the less intensity of that portion of 
the field of the telescope in which is the image of the Moon, that the 
outline of this image is perceptible. If this image were more intense 
than the remaining part of the field, tje vision would be positive." 
(Compare also, on this subject, Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 56, note *.) 

* Cosmos, vol. iv., p. 63-67 



MERDURY. 



13f^ 



or smaller pores, and, when illuminated, present the appear^ 
ance of red columns of vapor, and clouds of various forms in 
the third envelope of the Sun. 

Mercury. 

When it is rememhered how much the Egyptians^ occu- 
pied themselves with the plan3t Mercury (Set-Horus), and 
the Indians with their Buddha,t since the earliest tinics ; 
how, under the clear heaven of Western Arabia, the star- 
worship of the race of the AseditesJ was exclusively directed 
to Mercury ; and, moreover, that Ptolemy was able, in the 
19th book of the Almagest, to make use of fourteen observa- 
tions of this planet, which reach back to 261 years before 
our era, and partly belong to the Chaldeans, § it is certainly 
astonishing that Copernicus, who had reached his seventieth 
year, should have lamented, when on his death-bed, that with 
all his endeavors, he had never seen Mercury. Still the 
Greeksll justly characterized this planet by the name of 
{oriXtGiv) the sparkling, on account of its occasionally very 
intense light. It presents phases (variable form of the illu- 
minated part of the disk) the same as Venus, and, like the 
latter, appears to us as a morning and evening star. 

Mercury is, in his mean distance, little more than 32 mill- 
ions of geographical miles from the Sun, exactly 0-3870938 
parts of the mean distance of the Earth from the Sun. On 
account of the great eccentricity of its orbit (0-2056163), the 
distance of Mercury from the Sun in perihelion is 25 millions, 
in aphelion 40 millions of miles. He completes his revolu- 
tion round the Sun in 87 mean terrestrial days and 23h. 
15m. 46s. Schroter and Harding have estimated the rota- 
tion at 24h. 5m. from the uncertain observation of the form 
of the southern cusp of the crescent, and from the discovery 
of a dark streak, which was darkest toward the east. 

According to Bessel's determination on the occasion of the 
transit of Mercury on May 5, 1832, the true diameter amounts 
to 2684 geographical miles,1[ i. e., 0-391 parts of the Earth's 
diameter. 

* Lepsius, Chronologie der ^gypter, th. i., p. 92-96. 

t Cosmos, vol. iv., p. 93, note t, p. 92. X Ibid., vol. ii., p. 221. 

^ Lalande, in the Mim. de VAcad. des Sciences for 1766, p. 498 ; De- 
tambre, Hisioire de VAstron. Ancienne, torn, ii., p. 320. 

II Cosmos, vol. iv., p. 93. 

11 On the occasion of the transit of Mercury on the 4th of May, 1832, 
Madler and William Beer (Beitrdge zur Phys. Kenniniss der kimtn- 
Uschtn Kor^tr, 1841, p. 145) found the diameter of Mercury 2332 miles, 



i[38 COSMOS. 

The mass of Mercury was determined by Lagrange upon 
very bold assumptions as to the reciprocity of the relations of 
distances and densities. A means of improving this element 
was first afforded by Encke's Cornet of short period of rev- 
olution. The mass of this planet was fixed by Encke at 
4765TST of the Sun's mass, or about yi.Tj- of the Earth's. La- 
place^ gave the mass of Mercury as 2 025 sTo according to La- 
grange ; but the true mass is only -^-^ of that assigned by La- 
grange. By this correction, also, the previous hypothesis of 
the rapid increase of density in the planets, in proportion as 
they were nearer to the Sun, was disproved. When, with 
Hansen, the material contents of Mercury are assumed to be 
yI^ those of the Earth, the resulting density of Mercury is 
1-22. " These determinations," adds my friend, the author 
of them, " are to be considered only as first attempts, which, 
nevertheless, come much nearer the truth than the numbers 
assumed by Laplace." Ten years ago the density of Mer- 
cury was taken as nearly three times greater than the dens- 
ity of the Earth— as 2-56 or 294, when the Earth =1-00. 

Venus. 

The mean distance of this planet from the Sun, expressed 
in fractional parts of the Earth's distance from the Sun, i. e., 
60 million geographical miles, is 0-7233317. The period of 
its sidereal, or true revolution, is 224 days, 16h. 49m. 7s. 
No principal planet comes so near the Earth as Venus. She 
can approach the Earth to within a distance of 21,000,000 
miles, but can also recede from it to a distance of 144,000,000 
miles. This is the reason of the great variability of her ap- 

but in the edition of the Astronomie of 1849, Madlerhas given the pref- 
erence to Bessel's result. 

* Laplace, Exposition du Syst. du Monde, 1824, p. 209. The cele- 
brated author admits, however, that in the determination of the mass 
of Mercury, he founded his opinion upon the " hypoth^se tr^s precaire 
qui suppose les densit6s de Mercure et de la Terre reciproques k leur 
moyenue distance du Soleil." " The very precarious hypothesis which 
supposes the densities of Mercury and the Earth reciprocal to their mean 
distance from the Sun." I have not considered it necessary to mention 
either the chain of mountains, 61,826 feet in height, which SchrSter 
states that he saw upon the disk of Mercuiy and measured, and which 
Kaiser {Sternenhimmel, 1850, $ 57) doubts the existence of, or the vis 
ibility of an atmosphere round Mercury during his transit over the Sun, 
asserted by Lemonnier and Messier (Delambre, Hisi. de V Astronomie 
au dixhuitieme siicle, p. 222), or the temporary darkening of the surface 
of the planet. On the occasion of the transit which I observed in Peru 
on the 8th of November, 1802, I very closely examined the outline of 
the planet during the egress, but observed no indications of an envelop© 



VENUS. 139 

parent diameter, which by no means alone determines the 
degree of brilliancy.* The eccentricity of the orbit of Venus 
expressed, as in all cases, in fractional parts of half the major 
axes, is only 0-00686182. The diameter of this planet is 
6776 geographical miles; the mass ^-otVso' *^^ material 
contents 0-957, and the density 0*94 in comparison to the 
Earth. 

Of the transits of the two hiferior planets first announced 
by Kepler after the appearance of his E-udolphine tables, 
that of Yenus is of most importance for the theory of the 
whole planetary system, on account of the determination of 
the Suns parallax, and the distance of the Earth from the 
Sun deduced from the latter. According to Encke's thor- 
ough investigation of the transit of Yenus in 1769, the Sun's 
parallax is 8"-57ll6. (Berliner Jahrbuch for 1852, p. 323.) 
A. new examination of the Sun's parallax has been under- 
taken since 1849, by command of the government of the 
United States, at the suggestion of Professor Gerling of Mar- 
burg. The parallax is to be obtained by means of observa- 
tions of Yenus near the eastern and western stationary points, 
as well as by micrometer measurements of the differences in 
the right ascension and declination of well-determined fixed 
stars in very different latitudes and longitudes. (Schum., 
Astr. Nachr., No. 599, p. 363, and No. 613, p. 193.) The 
astronomical expedition, under the command of the learned 
Lieutenant Gilliss, has proceeded to Santiago in Chili. 

The rotation of Yenus was long subject to great doubt 
Dominique Cassini, 1669, and Jacques Cassini, 1732, found 

* " That point of the orbit of Venus in which she can appear to us 
with the brightest light, so that she may be seen at noon even with the 
naked eye, lies between the inferior conjunction and the greatest di- 
gression, near the latter, and near the distance of 40° from the Sun, or 
from the place of the inferior conjunction. On the average, Venus ap- 
pears with the finest light when distant 40° east or west from the Sun, 
in which case her apparent diameter (which in the inferior conjunction 
can increase to 66") is only 40", and the greatest breadth of her ilki- 
minated phase measures scarcely 10". The degree of proximity to the 
Earth then gives the small luminous crescent such an intense light, that 
it throws shadows in the absence of the Sun." — Littrow, Theoretische 
Asiranomie, 1834, th. ii., p. 68. Whether Copernicus predicted the ne 
cessity of a future discovery of the phases of Venus, as is asserted in 
Smith's Optics, sec. 1050, and repeatedly in many other works, has re- 
cently become altogether doubtful, from Professor de Morgan's strict 
examination of the woik De Revolutionibus, as it has come down to us. 
— See the letter from Adams to the Rev. R. Main, on the 7th of Sep- 
tember, 1846, in the Report of the Royal Astronomical Society, vol. vil.. 
No. 9, p. 142. (Compare also Cosmos, vol. ii., p. 325.) 



140 COSMOS. 

it 231i. 20m., while Bianchini* of Rome, 1726, assmne^ the 
slow rotation of 24^ days. More accurate observations by De 
Vice, from 1840 to 1842, afford, by means of a great number 
of spots upon Venus, as the mean value of her period of ro- 
tation, 23h. 2V 21"-93. 

These spots are not very distinct, and are mostly variable ; 
they seldom appear at the boundary of the separation be- 
tween light and shadow in the crescent-shaped phase of the 
planet, and both the Herschels, father and son, are conse- 
quently of opinion that they do not belong to the solid sur- 
face of the planet, but more probably to an atmosphere.! 
The changeable form of the horns of the crescent, especially 
the southern, has been taken advantage of by La Hire, 
Schroter, and Madler, partly for the estimation of the height 
of mountains, partly and more especially for the determina- 
tion of the rotation. The phenomena of this changeability 
are of such a nature that they do not require for their ex- 
planation the assumption of the existence of mountain- 
peaks, twenty geographical miles in height (121,520 feet), 
as Schroter of Lilienthal stated, but merely elevations like 
those which our planet presents in both continents. $ With 
the little that we know with certainty of the appearance of 
the surfaces of the planets near the Sun, Mercury, and Ve- 
nus, and their physical constitution, the phenomenon of an 
ash-colored light, sometimes observed in the dark parts, and 

* Delambre, Hisi. de VAstron. au dixhuitieme siecle, p. 256-258. The 
result obtained by Bianchini was supported by Hussey and Flaugergues; 
Hansen also, whose authority is justly so great, considered it to be the 
more probable until 1836. (Schumacher's Jahrbuch for 1837, p. 90.) 

t Arago, on the remarkable observation at Lilienthal on the 12th of 
August, 1700, in the Annuaire for 1842, p. 539. "Ce qui favorise aussi 
la probabilite de I'existence d'une atmosphere qui enveloppe Venus 
e'est le resultat optique obtenu par I'emploi d'une lunette prismatique. 
L'intensite de la lumiere de I'interieur du croissant est sensiblement 
plus faible que celle des points situes dans la partie circulaire du disque 
de la planete." — Arago, Manuscripts of 1847. "That circumstance 
which also favors the probability of the existence of an atmosphere 
sun-ounding Venus is the optical result obtained by employing a pris- 
matic telescope. The intensity of the light of the interior of the cres- 
cent is sensibly weaker than that of the points situated in the circular 
part of the planet's disk." 

X Wilhelm Beer and Miidlerj Beitrdge zur Physiscken Kenntniss der 
Himmlischen Korper, p. 148. The so-called moon of Venus, which 
Fontana, Dominique Cassini, and Short declared that they had seen, fbr 
which Lambert calculated tables, and which was said to have been 
seen in the center of the Sun's disk, full three hours after the egress of 
VenuS; belongs to the astronomical myths of an uncritical age. 



THE MOON. 141 

mentioned by Christian Mayer, William Herschel,* and 
Harding, also remains exceedingly mysterious. It is not 
probable that at so great a distance the reflected light of the 
Earth should produce an ash-colored illumination upon Ve- 
nus as upon our Moori. Hitherto there has been no flatten- 
ing observed in the disks of the two inferior planets, Mercu- 
ry and Venus. 

The Earth. 

The mean distance of the Earth from the Sun is 12,032 
times greater than the diameter of the Earth ; therefore, 
82,728,000 geographical miles, uncertain as to about 
360,000 miles (o-yo)- The period of the sidereal revolution 
of the Earth round the Sun is 365d. 6h. 9' 10"-7496. The 
eccentricity of the Earth's orbit amounts to 0-01679226 ; its 
mass is 3 j^Vjt &gt; i^^ density in relation to water, 5-44. Bes- 
sel's investigation of ten measurements of degrees gave for 
the flattening of the Earth 29 9"'t5 3- The length of a geo- 
graphical mile, sixty of which are contained in one equato- 
rial degree, 951,807 toises, and the equatorial and polar di- 
ameters, 6875*6 and 6852-4 geographical miles. {Cosmos, 
vol. i., p. 65, note.) We restrict ourselves here to numerical 
data referring to the Earth's figure and motions : all that 
refers to its physical constitution is deferred until the con- 
cluding terrestrial portion of the Cosmos. 

The Moon of the Earth. 

The mean distance of the Moon from the Earth is 207,200 
geographical miles ; the period of sidereal revolution is 27d. 
7h. 43' ll"-5 ; the eccentricity of her orbit, 0-0548442 ; her 
diameter is 1816 geographical miles, nearly one fourth of 
the Earth's diameter; her material contents j\ those of the 
Earth ; the mass of the Moon is, according to Lindeman, 
■Q-^}j-ri (according to Peters and Schidloffsky, j\) of the mass 
of the Earth ; her density, 0619, therefore nearly three fifths 
of the density of the Earth. The moon has no perceptible 
flattening, but an extremely slight prolongation on the side 
toward the Earth, estimated 'theoretically. The rotation of 
the Moon upon its axis is completed exactly in the same time 
in which it revolves round the Earth, and this is probably the 
case with all other secondary planets. 

Tlie sunlight reflected from the Moon is in all zones mora 

Philos. Transact., 1795, vol. htxxvi., p. 214. 



142 COSMOS. 

feeble than the sunlight which is reflected by a white cloud 
in the daytime. When, in determining geographical longi- 
tudes, it is often necessary to take the distance of the Moon 
from the Sun, it is not unfrequently difficult to distinguish the 
Moon between the more intensely luminous masses of cloud. 
Upon mountain-heights, which lie between 12,791 and 17,057 
feet above the level of the sea, and where, in the clear mount- 
ain air, only feathery cirri are to be seen in the sky, I found 
the detection of the Moon's disk was much more easy, be- 
cause the cirrus reflects less sunlight on account of its loose 
texture, and the moonhght is less weakened by its passage 
through the rarer strata of air. The relative degree of in- 
tensity of the Sun's light to that of the full Moon deserves a 
new investigation, as Bouguer's universally received determ- 
ination, -go oVo 0' differs so widely from the certainly less prob- 
able one of Wollaston, -g ooVo o •* 

The yellow moonlight appears white by day, because the 
blue strata of air through which we see it presents the com- 
plementary color to yellow. t According to the numerous ob- 
servations which Arago made with his polariscope, the moon- 
light contains polarized light ; it is most perceptible during 
the first quarter and in the gray spots of the Moon's surface ; 
for example, in the great, dark, sometimes rather greenish ele- 
vated plains, the so-called Mare Crhium. Such elevated 
plains are generally intersected by metallic veins, in whose 
polyhedric figure the surfaces are inclined at that angle 
which is necessary for the polarization of the reflected sun- 
light. The dark tint of the surrounding space appears, in 
addition, to make the phenomenon still more obvious. With 
regard to the luminous central mountain of the group Arh- 
tarchus, upon which it has been frequently erroneously sup- 
posed that volcanic action has been seen, it did not present 
any greater polarization of light than other parts of the Moon. 
In the full Moon no admixture of polarized light was observ* 

* Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 95, and note t. 

i " La lumiere de la Lime est jaune, tandis que celle de V§nus est 
blanche. Pendant le jour la Lune parait blanche, parcequ'^ la lumiere 
du disque lunaire se mele la lumiere bleue de cette partie de I'atmo- 
sphere que la lumiere jaune de la Lune traverse." — Arago, in Handschr. 
of 1847. " The light of the Moon is yellow, while that of Venus is white 
The Moon appears white during the day, because the blue light of thai 
part of the atmosphere which the yellow light of the Moon traverses, 
mixes with the light of the lunar disk." The most refrangible rays of 
the spectrum, from blue to violet, unite with the less refrangible, from 
red to green, to form white. (Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 208, note *.) 



THE moon's light. 143 

able ; but during a total eclipse of the Moon (31st of May, 
1848), Arago detected indubitable signs of polarization in the 
reddened disk of the Moon, the latter being a phenomenon of 
which we shall speak further on. (Comptes Ile?idus, torn, 
xviii., p. 119.) 

That the moonlight is capable of2oroducing heat, is a dis- 
covery which belongs, like so many others of my celebrated 
friend Melloni, to the most important and surprising of our 
century. After many fruitless attempts, from those of La 
Hire to the sagacious Forbes,*^ Melloni was fortunate enough 
to observe, by means of a lens (lentille a echellons) of three 
feet jn diameter, which was destined for the meteorological 
station on Vesuvius, the most satisfactory indications of an el- 
evation of temperature during difierent changes of the Moon. 
Mosotti-Lavagna and Belli, professors of the Universities of 
Pisa and Pavia, were witnesses of these experiments, which 
gave results differing in proportion to the age and altitude 
of the Moon. It had not at that time (Summer, 1848) been 
determined what the elevation of temperature produced by 
Melloni's thermoscope, expressed in fractional parts of the 
centigrade thermometer, amounted to.f 

* Forbes, On the Refraction and Polarization of Heat, in the Trans' 
act. of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, vol. xiii., 1836, p. 131. 

t Lettre de M. Melloni a M. Arago sur la Puissance calorifique de la 
Lumiire de la Lune, in the Comptes Rendus, tom. xxii., 1846, p. 541-544 
Compare also, on account of tlie historical data, the Jahresbericht der 
Physicalischen Gesellschaft zu Berlin, bd. ii., p. 272. It had always 
appeared sufficiently remarkable to me, that, from the earliest times, 
when heat was determined only by the sense of feehng, the Moon had 
first excited the idea that light and heat might be separated. Among 
the Indians the Moon was called, in Sanscrit, the King of the stars of 
cold {^dtala, hima), also the cold-radiating Qiimdn^su), while the Sun 
was called a creator of heat {niddghakara). The spots upon the Moon, 
in which Western nations supposed they discerned ^.face, represent, 
according to the Indian notion, a roebuck or a hare ; thence the San- 
scrit name of the Moon {mrigadhara), roebuck-bearer, or {^sd'sabhrif), 
hare-bearer. (Scbtitz, Five Hymns of the Bhatti-Kdvya, 1837, p. 19-23.) 
Among the Greeks it was complained " that the sunlight reflected from 
the Moon should lose all heat, so that only feeble remains of it were 
transmitted by her." (Plutarch, in the dialogue " De Facia qucs in 
OrbeLunce apparel, Moralia,^^ ed. Wyttenbach, tom. iv., Oxon., 1797, p. 
793.) In Maci'obius (Comm. in Somnium Scip., i., 19, ed. Lud. Janus, 
1848, p. 105) it is said, " Luna speculi instar lumen quo illustratur . . . 
rursus emittit, nullum tamen ad nos preferentem sensum caloris : quia 
lucis radius, cum ad nos de origine sua, id est de Sole, pervenit, natu- 
ram secum ignis de quo nascitur devehit ; cum vero in LunjB corpus ii&gt; 
funditur et inde resplendet, solam refundit claritatem, non calorem. ' 
The same iu Macrobius, SatvmaL, lib. vii , cap. 16, ed. Bipont, tom 
ii., p. 277. 



144 C03M0S. 

The ash-gray light \vi:h which a part of tne Moon's disk 
shines when, some days before oi after the new Moon, she 
presents only a narrow crescent, illuminated by the Sun, is 
earth-light in the Moon, " the reflection of a reflection." The 
less the Moon appears illuminated for the Earth, so much the 
more is the Earth luminous for the Moon. But our planet 
shines upon the Moon with an intensity 13i times greater 
than the Moon upon the Earth ; and this light is sufficiently 
bright to become again perceptible to us by a second jeflec 
tion. By means of the telescope, mountain-peaks are distin- 
guished in the ash-gray light of the larger spots and isolated 
brightly-shining points, even when the disk is already more 
than half illuminated. =^ These phenomena become particu- 
larly striking between the tropics and upon the high mount- 
ain-plains of Cluito and Mexico. Since the time of Lambert 
and Schroter, the opinion has become prevalent that the ex- 
tremely variable intensity of the ash-gray light of the Moon 
depends upon the greater or less degree of reflection of the 
sunlight which falls upon the Earth, according as it is reflect- 
ed from continuous continental masses, full of sandy deserts, 
grassy steppes, tropical forests, and barren rocky ground, or 
from large ocean surfaces. Lambert made the remarkable 
observation (14th of February, 1774) of a change of the ash- 
colored moonlight into an olive green color, bordering upon 
yellow. " The Moon, which then stood vertically over the 
Atlantic Ocean, received upon its night side the green terres- 
trial light, which is reflected toward her when the sky is clear 
by the forest districts of South America."! 

The meteorological condition of our atmosphere modifies 
the intensity of the earth-light, which has to traverse the 

* Madler, Astron., $ 112. 

t See Lambert, Siir la Lumiere Cendrie de la Lune, in the Mim. de 
VAcad. de Berlin, annie 1773, p. 46 : " La Terre, vue des planetes, pour- 
ra paraitre d'une lumiere verddtre, a peu pres corame Mars nous paralt 
d'une couleur rougedtre." " The Earth, seen from the planets, may- 
appear of a green color, much the same as Mars affords to us of a 
reddish color." We will not, however, on that account, conjecture 
with this acute man that the planet Mars may be covered with a red 
vegetation, such as tlje rose-red bushes of Bougainvillaea. (Hum- 
boldt, Views of Nature, \*. 334.) " When in Central Europe the Moon, 
shortly before the new Moon, stands in the eastern heavens during the 
morning hour, she receives the earth-light principally from the large 
plateau surfaces of Asia and Africa. But if, after the new Moon, it stands 
during the evening in the west, it can only receive the reflection in less 
quantities from the narrower American continent, and principally from 
the wide ocean." — Wilhelm Beer and Madler, Der Mond nach seinen 
Cosmischen Verhdltnissen, ^ 106, p. 152. 



THE MOON S LIGHT. 145 

double course from tlje Earth to the Moon, and from thence 
to our eye. " Thus, when we have better photometric in- 
struments at our command, we may be able," as Arago re- 
marks,*= '' to read in the Moon the history of the mean con- 
dition of the diaphaneity of our atmosphere." The first cor- 
rect explanation of the nature of the ash-colored light of the 
Moon is ascribed by Kepler {ad Vitellionem Paralipomena, 
quibus AstronomicB pars Optica traditur, 1604, p. 254) to 
his highly venerated teacher Mastlin, who had made it known 
in a thesis pubHcly defended at Tiibingen in 1596. Galileo 
spoke (Sidereus Nuncius, p. 26) of the reflected terrestrial 
light as a phenomenon which he had discovered several years 
previously ; but a century before Kepler and Galileo, the ex- 
planation of terrestrial light visible to us in the Moon had not 
escaped the all-embracing genius of Leonardo da Vinci. His 
long-forgotten manuscripts furnished a proof of this. f 

In the total eclipse of the Moon, the disk very rarely dis- 
appears entirely ; it did so, according to Kepler's earliest ob- 
servation,:}: on the 9th of December, 1601, and more recently, 
on the 10th of June, 1816 ; in the latter instance so as not 
to be visible from London, even by the aid of telescopes. The 
cause of this rare and extraordinary phenomenon must be a 

* Siance de VAcadimie des Sciences, le 5 Aout, 1833, " M. Arago sig- 
nale la comparaison de I'intensite lumineuse de la portion de la Luue 
que les rayons solaires ^clairent directement, avec celle de la partie du 
m^me astre qui re^oit seulement les rayons r^flecliis par la Terre. II 
croit d'apres les experiences qu'il a dej^ tentees k cet egard, qu'on 

{)ourra, avec des instrumens perfectionnes, saisir dans la himiere cendrie 
es differences de I'eclat plus on moins nuageux de I'atmosphere de 
notre globe. 11 n'est done pas impossible, malgre tout ce qu'un pareil 
resultat exciterait de surprise au premier coup d'oeil, qu'un jour les me- 
teorologistes aillent puiser dans I'aspect de la Lune des notions pre- 
cieuses sur Vitat moyen de diaphanite de I'atmosphere terrestre, dans les 
hemispheres qui successivement concourrent k la production de la lu- 
miere cendree." " M. Arago pointed out the comparison between the 
luminous intensity of that portion of the Moon which is illuminated di- 
rectly by the solar rays, and that portion of the same body which re- 
ceives only the rays reflected by the Earth. After the experiments 
which he has already made in reference to this subject, he is of opinion 
that with improved instruments it will be possible to detect in the ashy 
lieht indications of the differences in bi'ightness, more or less cloudy, 
of the atmosphere of our globe. It is not, therefore, impossible, not- 
withstanding the surprise which such a result may excite on the first 
view, that one day meteorologists will derive valuable ideas as to the 
mean state of the diaphaneity of our atmosphere in the hemispheres 
which successively contribute to the production of the ashy light." 

t Venturi, Essai sur les Ouorages de Leonard de Vinci, 1797, p. 11. 

t Kepler, Paralip. vcl Astronomuz pars Optica, 1604, p. 297. 
Vol. IV.— G 



146 COSMOS. 

peculiar and not sufficiently investigated diaphanic conditioq 
of individual strata of our atmosphere. Hevelius states dis- 
tinctly that, during a total eclipse on the 25th of April, 1642, 
the sky vras covered with brilliant stars, the atmosphere per- 
fectly clear, and yet, with the difierent magnifying powers 
which he employed, not a vestige of the Moon could be seen. 
In other cases, likewise very rare, only separate parts of the 
Moon are feebly visible. During a total eclipse, the disk gen- 
erally appears red ; and, indeed, in all degrees of intensity of 
color, even passing, when the Moon is far distant from the 
Earth, into a fiery and glowing red. While lying at anchor 
off the island of Baru, not far from Carthagena de Indias, 
half a century ago (29th of March, 1801), I observed a total 
eclipse, and was extremely struck w^ith the greater luminous 
intensity of the Moon's disk under a tropicalsky than in my 
native north.* The whole phenomenon is known to be a 
consequence of refraction, since, as Kepler very correctly ex- 
presses himself [Paralip Astron. 'pars Optica, p. 893), the 
Sun's rays are inflectedf by their passage through the at- 

* " On congoit que la vivacite de la lumiere rouge lie depend paj 
uniquement de I'etat de I'atraosphere, qui refracte, plus ou moins affai 
blis, les rayons solaires, en les enflecliissant dans le cone d'ombre, niais 
qu'elle est modifiee surtout par la transparence variable de la partie de 
I'atmosphere k travel's laquelle nous apercevons la Lune eclipsee. Sous 
les tropiques, une grande sereiiite du ciel, une dissemination uniforme 
des vapeurs diminuent I'extinction de la lumiere que le disque lunaire 
nous renvoie." — Humboldt, Voyage aux H^gians Eqitinoxiales, torn, iii., 
p. 544 ; and Recueil d'Observ. Astronomiqnes, vol. ii., p. 145. " It may 
easily be understood that the intensity of the red light does not depend 
solely upon the state of the atmosphere, which refracts more or less 
feebly the solar rays by inflecting them into the shadow cone, but that 
it is especially modified by the variable transparency of that part of 
the atmosphere across which we perceive the eclipsed Moon. Under 
the tropics a great serenity of sky, a uniform dissemination of vapors, 
diminish the extinction of the light which the lunar disk sends toward 
us." Arago observes : " Les rayons solaires arrivent k notre satellite 
par I'effet d'une refraction et k la suite d'une absorption dans les couches 
les plus bases de I'atmosphere terrestre ; pourraient-ils avoir une autre 
teiute que le rouge?" — Annuaire for 1842, p. 528. "The solar rays 
reach our planet by the effect of a refraction, and subsequently to an 
absorption (partial) in the lower strata of the Earth's atmosphere. How 
can they have any other colors than red ?" 

t Babinet declares the reddening to be a consequence of diffraction, 
in a memoir as to the different share of the white, blue, and red lights 
which are produced by the inflection. See his Reflections upon the 
Total Eclipse of the Moon on the 19th of March, 1848, in Moigno's RS- 
pertoire d^Optique Moderne, 1850, tom. iv., p. 1656. " La lumiere dif. 
fract^e qui penetre dans I'ombre de la Terre, predomine toujours et 
m^mo a ^t6 seule sensible. Elle est d'autant plus rouge ou orangfee 



THE MOON. 147 

mosphere, and thrown into the shadow cone. The reddened 
or glowing disk is moreover never uniformly colored. Some 
places always appear darker, and are, at the same time, con; 
tinually changing color. The Greeks had formed a peculiar 
and curious theory with respect to the different colors which 
the eclipsed Moon was said to present according to the hour 
at which the eclipse took place.* 

During the long dispute as to the probability or improba- 
bility of an atmospheric envelope round the Moon, accurate 
occult observations have proved that no refraction takes 
place on the surface of the Moon, and that, consequently, the 
assumption made by Schroterf of the existence of a lunar 
atmosphere and a lunar tivilight are disproved. " The 
comparison of the two values of the Moon's diameter which 
may be respectively deduced from direct measurement, oi 
from the length of time that it remains before a fixed stai 
during the occultation, teaches us that the light of a fixed 
star is not perceptibly deflected from its rectilinear course at 

qu'elle se trouve plus pres du centre de I'orabre geom^trique ; car se 
Bout les rayous les moins refrangibles qui se propagent le plus abou 
damment par diflfraction, k mesure qu'on s'eloigne de la propagation en 
ligne droite." " The ditFracted light which penetrates into the Earth's 
shadow always predominated, and was, indeed, alone sensible. It was 
tlie more red or orange in proportion as it was nearer to the geomet- 
rical center of the shadow ; for those rays which are least refrangible 
are those which are propagated most abundantly by diflfraction, in pro 
portion as they differ from a rectilinear course." The phenomena of 
diffraction take place as well in a vacuum, according to the acute in 
vestigations of Magnus (on the occasion of a discussion between Aii-j 
and Faraday). Compare, in reference to the explanations by diffrac 
tion in general, Arago in the Annuaire for 1846, p. 452-455. 

* Plutarch {De Facie in Orhe Lunce), Moral., ed. Wytten., torn, iv . 
p. 780-783 : " The fiery, charcoal-like, glimmering {dvOpaKoeidng) coloi 
of the eclipsed Moon (about the midnight hour) is, as the mathemati- 
cians affirm, owing to the change from black into red and bluish, and 
is by no means to be considered as a character peculiar to the earthy 
surface of the planet." Also Dio Cassius (Ix., 26, ed. Sturz, p. iii., p 
779), who occupied himself especially with eclipses of the Moon, and 
the remarkable edicts of the Emperor Claudius, which predicted the di' 
mensions of the eclipsed portion, directs attention to the very different 
colors which the Moon assumed during the conjunction. He says (Ixv., 
11, torn, iv., p. 185, Sturtz), "Great was the excitement in the camp 
of Vitellius in consequence of the eclipse which took place that night. 
The mind was filled with melancholy apprehensions, not so much at 
the eclipse itself, although that might appear to predict misfortune to 
an unquiet mind, but much more from the circumstance that the Moon 
displayed blood-red, black, and other gloomy colors." 

t SchrSter, Selenotopographische Fragmente, th. i., 1791, p. 668; th. 
ii., 1802, p. 52. 



148 COSMOS. 

that moment in which it touches the Moon's edge. If a re- 
fraction took place at the edge of the Moon, the second de- 
termination of her diameter must give a value smaller by 
tw^ice the amount of the refraction than the former ; but, on 
the contrary, both determinations correspond so closely in 
repeated determinations, that no appreciable difference has 
ever been detected."=^ The ingress of stars, which may be 
particularly well observed at the dark edge, takes place 
suddenly, and without gradual diminution of the star's brill- 
iancy ; just so the egress or reappearance of the star. In 
the case of the few exceptions which have been described, 
the cause may have consisted in accidental changes of oui 
atmosphere. 

If, however, the Earth's Moon is destitute of a gaseous 
envelope, the stars must appear then, in the absence of all 
diffuse ' light, to rise upon a black sky ;t no air- wave can 
there convey sound, music, or language. To our imagina- 
tion, so apt presumptuously to stray into the unfathomable, 
the Moon is a voiceless wilderness. 

The phenomenon of apparent adherence on and within the 
Moon's edge,$ sometimes observed in the occultation of stars, 
can scarcely be considered as a consequence of irradiation, 
which, in the narrow crescent of the Moon, on account of 
the very different intensity of the light in the ash-colored 
part of the Moon, and in that which is immediately illumin- 
ated by the Sun, certainly makes the latter appear as if sur- 
rounding the former. Arago saw, during a total eclipse of the 
Moon, a star distinctly adhere to the slightly luminous disk 
of the Moon during the conjunction. It still continues to be 

* Bessel, TJeher eine angenommene Atmosphdre des Mondes in Schu- 
macher's Asiron. Nachr., No. 263, p. 416-420. Compare also Beer and 
Madler, Der Monde, § 83 and 107, p. 133 and 153; also Arago, in the 
Annuaire for 1846, p. 346-353. The frequently mentioned proof of the 
existence of an atmosphere round the Moon, derived from the greater or 
less perceptibility of small superficial configurations and "the Moon- 
clouds moving round in the valleys," is the most untenable of all, on 
account of the continually-varying condition (darkening and bi'ighten- 
ing) of the upper strata of our own atmosphere. Considerations as to 
the form of one of the Moon's horns qn the occasion of the solar eclipso 
on the 5th of Septepber, 1793, induced William Herschel to decide 
against the assumption of a lunar atmosphere. (Pkilos. Transact., vol. 
ixxxiv., p. 167.) 

t Madler, in Schumacher's Jahrbuch for 1840, p. 188. 

j Sir John Herschel (Outlines, p. 247) directs attention to the ingress 
of such double stars as can not be seen separately by the telescope, on 
account of the too great proximity of the individual stars of which they 
consist. 



THE MOON. 149 

a subject of discussion between Arago and Plateau whether 
the phenomenon here mentioned depends upon deceptive per- 
ception and physiological causes,*^ or upon the aberration of 
sphericity and refrangibility of the eye.f Those cases in 
which it has been asserted that a disappearance and reap- 
pearance, and then a repeated disappearance, have been ob- 
served during an occultation, may probably indicate the in- 
gress to have taken place at a part of the Moon's edge which 
happened to be deformed by mountain declivities and deep 
chasms. 

The great differences in the reflected light from particular 
regions of the illuminated disk of the Moon, and especially 
the absence of any sharp boundary between the inner edge 
of the illuminated and ash-colored parts in the Moon's phases, 
led to the formation of several very rational theories as to 
the inequalities of the surface of our satellite, even at a very 
emote period. Plutarch says distinctly, in the small but 
very remarkable work On the Face in the Moon, that we 
may suppose the spots to be partly deep chasms and valleys, 
partly mountain peaks, " which cast long shadows, like Mount 
Athos, whose shadow reaches Lemnos."$ The spots cover 
about two fifths of the whole disk. In a clear atmosphere, 
and under favorable circumstances in the position of the 

* Plateau, Sur V Irradiation, in the Mim. de V Acad. Royale des Sci 
ences et Belles-Leitres de Bruxelles, torn, xi., p. 142, aud the supplement- 
ary vokime of PoggendorfF's Annalen, 1842, p. 79-128, 193-232, and 
405 and 443. " The probable cause of the irradiation is an irritation 
produced by the light upon the -retina, and spreads a little beyond the 
outline of the image." 

t Arago, in the Comptes Rendus, torn, viii., 1839, p. 713 and 883. 
" Les phenomenes d'irradiation signales par M. Plateau sont regarcl6a 
par M. Arago comme les effets des aberrations de refrangibilit6 et de 
sphericite de I'oeil, combines avec I'indistinction de la vision, conse- 
quence des circonstances dans lesquelles les observateurs se sont places. 
Des mesures exactes prises sur des disques noirs k fond blanc et des 
disques blancs k fond noir, qui 6taient places au Palais du Luxembourg 
visibles k I'observatoire, n'ont pas indique les effets de I'irradiation.' 
" The phenomena of irradiation pointed out by M. Plateau are regarded 
Dy M. Arago as the effects of the aberration of sphericity and refrangi- 
bility of the eye, combined with the indistinctness of vision consequent 
upon the circumstances in which the observers are placed. The exact 
measurement taken of the black disks upon a 'vyhite ground, and the 
white disks upon a black ground, which were placed upon the palace 
of Luxembourg, and visible at the Observatory, did not present auy 
phenomena of irradiation." 

t Plutarch, Moral., ed. Wytten., torn, iv., p. 786-789. The shad"-v 
of Athos, which was seen by the traveler Pierre Belon {Observations -^ 
Sing-ularitis troitvSes en Grece, Asie, etc., 1554, liv. i., cbap. 25), reacl. 4 
the brazen cow in the market-town Myrine in Lemnos. 



160 COSMOS. 

Mood, some of the spots are visible to the naked eye ; tha 
ridge of the Apennines, the dark, elevated plain GHmaldus, 
the inclosed Mare Crisium, and Tycho,* crowded round 
with numerous mountain ridges and craters. It has been 
affirmed, not without probability, that it was especially the 
aspect of the Apennine chain which induced the Greeks to 
consider the spots on the Moon to be mountains, and at the 
same time to associate with them the shadow of Mount 
Athos, which in the solstices reached the Brazen Cow upon 
Lemnos. Another very fantastic opinion was that of Agesv- 
nax, disputed by Plutarch, according to which the Moon's 
disk was supposed, like a mirror, to present to us again, ca- 
toptric ally, the configuration and outline of our continent, 
and the outer sea (the Atlantic). A very similar opinion ap- 
pears to have been preserved to this time as a popular belief 
among the people in Asia Minor. f 

By the careful application of large telescopes, it has grad- 

* For proofs of the visibility of these four objects, see in Beer and 
Madler, Der Mond., p. 241, 338, 191, and 290. It is scarcely necessary 
to mention that all which refers to the topography of the Moon's surface 
is derived from the excellent work of my two friends, of whom the 
second, William Beer, was taken from us but too early. The beautiful 
Uebersichtsblatt, which Madler published in 1837, three years after the 
large map of the Moon, consisting of three sheets, is to be recommended 
for the purpose of more easily becoming acquainted with the bearings. 

+ Plut., De Facie in Orbe Lunee, p. 726-729, Wytten. This passage 
is, at the same time, not without interest for ancient geography. — See 
Humboldt, Examen Criiiqus de V Hist, de la G6ogr., torn, i., p. 145. 
With regard to other views of the ancients, see Anaxagoras and De- 
mocritus, in Plut., De Plac. Philos., ii., 25 ; Parmenides, in Stob., p. 419, 
453, 516, and 563, ed. Heeren; Schneider, Eclogce Physicce, vol. i., p. 
433-443. According to a very remarkable passage in Plutarch's Life 
of Nicias, cap. 42, Anaxagoras himself, who calls "the mountainous 
Moon another Earth," had made a drawing of the Moon's disk. {Com- 
pare also Origines, Philosophumena, cap. 8, ed. Mtilleri, 1851, p. 14.) 
I was once very much astonished to hear a very well-educated Per- 
sian, from Ispahan, who certainly had never read a Greek book, men- 
tion, when I showed him the Moon's spots in a large telescope in Paris, 
the hypothesis of Agesiuax (alluded to in the text) as to the reflection, 
as a widely-diffused popular belief in his country. '* What we see 
there in the Moon," said the Persian, "is ourselves; it is the map of 
our Earth." One of the interlocutors in Plutarch's Moon-dialogue would 
not have expressed himself otherwise. If it can be supposed that men 
are inhabitants of the Moon, destitute "of water and air, the Earth, with 
its spots, would also present to them such a map upon a nearly black 
sky by day, with a surface fourteen times greater than that w^hich the 
full Moon presents to us, and always in the same position. But the 
constantly varying clouds and obscurities of our atmosphere would con- 
fuse the outlines of the continents. — Compare MUdler^B A str on-, p. 169 
and Sir John Herschel, Outlines, $ 43G. 



THE MOON. 151 

aally become possible to construct a topographical chart of 
the Moon, based upon actual observations ; and since, in the 
opposition, the entire half-side of the Earth's satellite presents 
itself at the same moment to our investigation, we knov^^ more 
of the general and merely formal connection of the mountain 
groups in the Moon, than of the orography of a whole terres- 
trial hemisphere containing the interiors of Africa and Asia. 
Generally the darker parts of the disk are the lower and more 
level ; the brighter parts, reflecting much sunhght, are the 
more elevated and mountainous. Kepler's old description of 
the two as sea and land has long been given up ; and the 
accuracy of the explanation, and the opposition, was already 
doubted by Hevel, notwithstanding the similar nomenclature 
introduced by him. The circumstance principally brought 
forward as disproving the presence of surfaces of water on 
the Moon was, that in the so-called seas of the Moon, the 
smallest parts showed themselves, upon closer examination 
and very different illumination, to be completely uneven, pol- 
yhedric, and consequently giving much 'polarized hght. Ar- 
ago has pointed out, in opposition to the arguments which 
have been derived from the irregularities, that some of these 
surfaces may, notwithstanding the irregularities, be covered 
with water, and belong to the bottoms of seas of no great 
depth, since the uneven, craggy bottom of the ocean of our 
planet is distinctly seen when viewed from a great height, 
on account of the preponderance of the light issuing from be- 
low its surface over the intensity of that which is reflected 
from it. {Annuaire du Bureau des Longitudes for 1836, 
p. 339-343.) In the work of my friend, which will shortly 
appear, on astronomy and photometry, the probable absence 
of water upon our satellite will be deduced from other optical 
grounds, which can not be developed in this place. Among 
the low plains, the largest surfaces are situated in the north- 
ern and eastern parts. The indistinctly bounded Oceanus 
Procellarum has the greatest extension of all these, being 
360,000 geographical miles. Connected with the Mare Ini- 
hrium (64,000 square miles), the Mare Nubium, and, to 
some extent, with the Mare Humorum, and surrounding in- 
sular mountain districts (the Rijohcei, Kepler, Cojoernicus, 
and the Carpathians), this eastern part of the Moon's disk 
presents the most decided contrast to the luminous south- 
tvestern district, in which mountain is crowded upon mount- 
ain.* In the northwest region, two basins present them- 
* Beer and Madler, p. 273. 



152 COSMOS. 

selves AS being more shut in and isolated, the Msre Crisiiirtk 
(12,000 square miles) and the 3Iare Tranquillitatis (23,200 
square miles). 

The color of these so-called i&gt;tas is not in all cases gray. 
The Mare Crisium is gray mixed with dark green ; the Mare 
Serenitatis and Mare Humorum are likewise green. Near 
the Hercynian mountains, on the contrary, the isolated cir- 
cumvallation Lichtenherg presents a pale reddish color, the 
same as Palus Somnii. Circular surfaces, without central 
mountains, have for the most part a dark steel-gray color, 
bordering upon bluish. The causes of this great diversity in 
the tints of the rocky surface, or other porous materials which 
cover it, are extremely mysterious. While, to the northward 
of the Alpine mountains, a large inclosed plain, Plato (called 
by Hevel Lacus niger major), and still more Grimaldus in 
the equatorial region, and Endymion on the northwest edge, 
are the three darkest spots upon the whole Moon's disk, Aris- 
tarchus, with its sometimes almost star-hke shining points, is 
the brightest and most brilliant. All these alternations of 
light and shade affect an iodized plate, and may be repre- 
sented in Daguerreotype, by means of powerful magnifiers, 
with wonderful truthfulness. I myself possess such a mooji- 
light picture of two inches diameter, in which the so-called 
ieas and ring-formed mountains are distinctly perceptible ; it 
was executed by an excellent artist, Mr. "Whipple, of Boston. 

If the circular form is striking in some of the s,ea$ ( Cris- 
ium, Serenitatis, and Humorurri), it is still more frequently 
— indeed, almost universally, repeated in the mountainous 
part of the disk, especially in the configuration of the enor- 
mous mountain-masses which occupy the southern hemisphere 
from the pole to near the equator, where the mass runs out 
in a point. Many of the annular elevations and inclosed 
plains (according to Lohrmann, the largest are more than 
4000 square miles in extent) form connected series, and, in- 
deed, in the direction of the meridian, between 5° and 40° 
south latitude.* The northern polar region contains cpm- 
paratively few of these crowded mountain circles. In the 
western edge of the northern hemisphere, on the contrary, 
they form a connected group between 20° and 50° north 
latitude. The North Pole itself is within a few degrees of 
the Mare Frigoris, and thus, like the whole level northeast- 
ern space, including only a few isolated annular mountain? 
{Plato, Mairan, Aristarch, Copernicus, and Kepler), pre 
* Schumacher's Jahrbuch for 1841, p. 270. 



THE MOON. ' 153 

Bents a great contrast to the South Pole, entirely covered with 
mountains. Here lofty peaks shine during whole lunations 
in eternal light, in the strictest sense of the word ; they are 
true lig^ht islands, which become perceptible, even with feeble 
magnifying powers.* 

As exceptions to this type of circular and annular configu- 
rations, so universally predominant upon the Moon, are the 
actual mountain-chains which occur almost in the middle of 
the northern half of the Moon {^Apennines, Cauca.sus, and 
Alps). They extend from south to north in a slight curve to- 
ward the west, through nearly 32° of latitude. Innumer- 
able mountain crests and extraordinary sharp peaks are here 
thronged together. Few annular mountains, or crater-Hke 
depressions, are intermingled {Coiion, Hadley, Calippus), 
and the whole resembles more the configuration of our mount- 
ain-chains upon the Earth. The lunar Alps, which are in- 
ferior in height to the lunar Caucasus and Apermines, pre- 
sent a remarkable brojd transverse valley, which intersects 
the chain from southeast to northwest. It is surrounded by 
mountain peaks which exceed in 'height that of Tenerifie. 

The relative height of the elevations in proportion to the 
diameters of the Moon and the Earth, gives the remarkable 
result, that since in the four times smaller satellite the high- 
est peaks are only 3836 feet lower than those of the Earth, 
the lunar mountains amount to ^-i^, the mountains on the 
Earth to y^g-y of the planetary diameters, f Among the 1095 
points of elevation already measured upon the Moon, I find 
39 are higher than Mont Blanc (16,944 feet), and six higher 
than 19,000 feet. The measurements were effected either 
by light tangents (by determining the distance of the illumin- 
ated mountain peak on the right side of the Moon from the 
boundary of the light) or by the length of the shadows. The 
former method was already made use of by Galileo, as is seen 
from his letter to the Father Grienberger upon the Montu- 
ositd della Luna. 

According to Madler's careful measurements by means of 
the length of the shadows, the culminating points of the 

* Madler, Astron., p. 16G. 

t The highest peak of the Himalayas, and (up to the present time!) 
of the whole Earth, Kinchin-jnnga, is, according to Waugh's recent 
measurement, 4406 toises, or 28,178 English feet; the highest peak 
among the Moon's mountains is, according to Madler, 3800 toises (ex- 
actly four geographical miles). The diameter of the Moon is 1816, 
that of the Earth 6872 geographical miles ; whence it follows for the 
Moon ^^j, for the Earth yj^y 

G 2 



154 COSMOS. 

Moon are in descending order at the south edge, very near tho 
Pole, D'orfel and Leibnitz, 24,297 feet ; the annular mountain 
Newton, where a part of the deep hollow is never lighted, 
neither by the Sun nor the Earth's disk, 23,830 feet ; Casa- 
tus, eastward of Newton, 22,820 feet ; Calippus, in the Cau- 
casian chain, 20,396 feet; the Apennines, hetween 17,903 
and 19,182 feet. It must be remarked here, that in the en- 
tire absence of a general niveau-line (the plane of equal dis- 
tance from the center of a cosmical body, as is presented on 
our planet by the level of the sea), the absolute heights are 
not to be compared strictly with each other, since the six 
numerical results here given properly express only the differ- 
ences between the peaks and the immediately surrounding 
plains or hollows.* It is, however, very remarkable that 
G-alileo likewise assigned to the loftiest lunar mountains the 
height of about four geographical miles (24,297 feet), " in- 
drca miglia quatro,"' and, in accordance with the extent of 
\iis hypsometric knowledge, considered them higher than any 
5f the mountains on the Earth. 

An extremely remarkable and mysterious phenomenon 
which the surface of our satellite presents, and which is only 
optically connected wdth a reflection of light, and not hyp- 
Bometrically with a difference of elevation, consists in the nar- 
row streaks of light which disappear when the illuminating 
rays fall obliquely ; but in the full Moon, quite in opposition 
to the Moon-spots, become most visible as systems of rays. 
They are not mineral veins, cast no shadow, and run with 
equal intensity of light from the plains to elevations of more 
than 12,780 feet. The most extensive of these ray-systems 
commences from TycJio, where more than a hundred streaks 
of ^ight may be distinguished, mostly several miles broad. 
Similar systems which surround the Aristarchus, Kepler, Co- 
pernicus, and the Carpathians, are almost all in connection 
with each other. It is difficult to conjecture, by the aid of 
induction and analogy, what special transformations of the 
surface give rise to these luminous, ribbon-like rays, proceed- 
ing from certain annular mountains. 

The frequently mentioned type of circular configuration, 
almost every where preponderating upon the Moon's disk, in 
the elevated plains which frequently surround central mount- 
ains ; in the large annular mountains and their craters (22 
are counted close together in Bayer, and 33 in Albateg?iius) 

* For the six heights which exceed 19,182 feet, see Beer and Mad- 
iei% p. 99, 125. 231 242. 330. and 331. 



THE MOON. 155 

must have early induced a deep-thinker like Robert Hooke 
to ascribe such a form to the reaction of the interior of the 
Moon upon the cxtejior — "the action of subterranean fire, 
and elastic eruptive vapors, and even to an ebullition in 
eruptive bubbles." Experiments with thickened boiling lime 
solutions appeared to him to confirm his opinion ; and the cir- 
cumvallations, vidth their central mountains, were at that time 
already compared with " the forms of JEtna, the Peak of 
TenerifFe, Hecla, and the Mexican volcanoes described by 
Gage."^ 

One of the annular plains of the Moon reminded Galileo, 
as he himself relates, of the configuration of countries entirely 
surrounded by mountains. I have discovered a passage! in 
which he compares these annular plains of the Moon with 
the great inclosed basin of Bohemia. Many of the plains are, 
in fact, not much smaller, for they have a. diameter of from 
1 00 to 1 20 geographical miles. $ On the contrary, the real an- 
nular mountains scarcely exceed 8 or 12 miles in diameter. 
Conon in the Apennines is 8 ; and a crater which belongs to 
the shining region of Aristarchus is said to present a breadth 
of only 25,576 feet, exactly the half of the diameter of the 
crater of Rucu-Pichincha, in the table-land of Gluito, meas- 
ured trigonometrically by myself 

Since we have in this place adhered to comparisons with 
well-known terrestrial phenomena and relations of magnitude, 
it is necessary to remark that the greater part of the plains 
and annular mountains of the Moon are to be considered in 
the first place as craters of elevation, without continuous 
phenomena of eruption in the sense of the hypothesis of Leo- 
pold von Buch. What, according to the European standard, 

* Robert Hooke, Micrographia, 1667, Obs. Ix., p. 242-246. '' These 
ieem to me to have been the effects of some motions within the body 
of the Moon, analogous to our earthquakes, by the eruption of which, 
as it has thrown up a brim or ridge round about higher than the am- 
bient surface of the Moon, so has it left a hole or depression in the mid- 
dle, proportjonably lower." Hooke says of his experiment with boil, 
iug alabaster, that " presently cecsiug to boyl, the whole surface will 
appear all over covered with small pits, exactly shaped like those of 
the Moon. The earthy part of the Moon has been undermined, or 
heaved up by eruptions of vapors, and thrown into the same kind of 
figured holes as the powder of alabaster. It is not improbable, also, 
that there may be generated within the body of the Moon divers such 
kind of internal fires and heats as may produce exhalations " 

t Cosmos, vol. ii., p. 319, note. 

\ Beer and Madler, p. 126. Ptolemaeus is 9Q miles in diameter 
Alphons and Hipparchus, 76 miles. 



156 COSMOS. 

we call great upon the Earth — ^the elevation crater of Rocca 
Monsina, Palma, TenerifFe, and Santorin — becomes insignifi- 
cant when compared with Ptolemy, Hipparchus, and many 
others of the Moon. Palma has only 24,297 feet diameter ; 
Santorin, according to Captain Graves, new measurement, 
33,148 feet; Teneriffe, at the utmost, 53,298 feet: conse- 
quently, only one eighth or one sixth of the two craters of 
elevation of the Moon just mentioned. The small crater of 
the Peak of Tenerifie and Vesuvius (from 319 to 426 feet in 
diameter) could scarcely be seen by the aid of telescopes. 
The by far greater number of the annular mountains have 
no central mountain ; and where there is one, it is described 
as being dome-formed or level {Hevelius, Macrobius), not as 
an erupted cone with an ope7ti7ig.'^ The active volcanoes 
which are stated to have been seen in the right side of the 
Moon (May 4, 1783) ; the phenomena of light in Plato, which 
Bianchini (August 16, 1725) and Short (April 22, 1751) ob- 
served, are here mentioned only as of historical interest, since 
the sources of deception have long been fathomed, and lie in 
the more powerful reflection of the terrestrial light which 
certain parts of the surface of our planet throw upon the ash- 
colored night side of the Moon.f 

* Arzachel and Hercules are supposed to be exceptions : the former 
to have a crater upon its summit, the second a lateral crater. These 
points, important in a geognostic point of view, deserve fresh investi- 
gation vv^ith more perfect instruments. (Schroter, Selenotopographische 
Fragmente, th. ii., tab. 44 and 68, fig. 23.) Hitherto no signs have ever 
been detected of lava streams collected in deep hollows. The radiated 
^mes which issue from Aristoteles in three directions are ranges of hills. 
(Beer and Madler, p. 236.) 

t Op. cit., p. 151. Arago, in the Annuaire for 1842, p. 526. (Com- 
pare also Immanuel Kant, Schriften der Physischen Geographie, 1839, 
p. 393-402.) According to recent and more complete investigations, 
the temporary changes said to have been observed upon the surface of 
the Moon (the formation of new central mountains and craters in the 
Mare Crisium, Hevelius, and Cleomedes), are illusions of a similar na- 
ture to the supposed volcanic eruptions perceptible to us upon the Moon. 
(See Schrbter, Selenotopographische Fragmente, th. i., p. 412-523 ; th. ii., 
p. 268-272.) The question, what is the smallest object whose height 
can be measured with the instruments which are at present at our com- 
mand? is in general difficult to answer. According to the report of Dr. 
Robinson upon the beautiful reflecting telescope of Lord Rosse, extents 
of 220 feet (80 to 90 yards) are discerned with the greatest distinctness. 
Madler calculates that, in his observations, shadows of 3" were capable 
of being measured ; a length which, under certain presuppositions as to 
the position of a mountain, and the altitude of the San, would indicate 
a mountain elevation of 120 feet. However, he points out, at the same 
time, that the shadows must have a certain degree of breadth in order 
to be visible and measurable. The shadow of the great pyramid of 



THE MOON 157 

Attention has been repeatedly, and Avith justice, directed 
to the fact, that in the absence of water upon the Moon (even 
the rills, very narrow, mostly rectilinear hollows,^ are not riv- 
ers), we must represent to ourselves the surface of the Moon 
as being somewhat similarly constituted as was the Earth in 
its primitive and most ancient condition, while yet uncovered 
ilotz strata, by bowlders and detritus, which were spread out 
by the transporting force of the ebb and flood or currents. 
Sun and Earth floods are naturally wanting ; where the liquid 
element is absent, shght coverings of decomposed conglomer- 
ates are scarcely conceivable. In our mountain-chains, up- 
heaved upon fissures, partial groups of elevations are begin- 
ning gradually to be discovered here and there, forming, as it 
were, egg-shaped basins. How entirely different the Earth's 
surface would have appeared to us if it were divested of the 
flotz and tertiary formations ! 

The Moon, by the variety of its phases, and the more rapid 
change of its relative position in the sky, animates and beau- 
tifies the aspect of the firmament under every zone more than 
all the other planets. She sheds her agreeable Hght upon 
men, more especially in the primitive forests of the tropical 
world, and the beasts of the forests. f The Moon, in virtue 

Cheops, according to the known dimensions of this monument (super- 
ficial extent), would be, even at the point of commencement, scarcely 
one ninth of a second broad, and consequently invisible. (Madler, in 
Schumacher's Jahrbuch for 1841, p. 264.) Arago calls to mind that, 
with a 6000-fold magnifying power, which, nevertheless, could not be 
applied to the Moon with proportionate results, the mountains upon the 
Moon would appear to us just as Mont Blanc does to the naked eye when 
seen from the Lake of Geneva. 

* The rills do not occur frequently ; are, at the utmost, thirty miles 
long; sometimes forked (Gassendi); seldom resembling mineral veins 
(Triesnecker) ; always luminous; do not cross mountains transversely; 
are peculiar to the level landscapes ; are not characterized by any pe 
culiarities at the terminal points, without becoming broader or narrow- 
er. (Beer and Madler, p. 131, 225, and 249.) 

t See my Essay upon the Nocturnal Life of Animals in the Primceval 
Forest, in the Views of Nature, Bohn's ed., p. 198. Laplace's reflections 
upon a perpetual moonlight {Exposition du Systeme du Monde, 1824, p. 
232) have met with a disproval in the M6m. of Liouville surun caspar- 
ticulier du problem des Trois Corps. Laplace says, *' Quelques partisans 
des causes finales ont imagine que la Lune a ete donnee k la Terra pour 
I'^clairer pendant les nuits ; dans ce cas, la nature n'aurait point atteint 
ie but qu'elle se serait propose, puisque nous sommes souvent prives k 
la fois de la lumiere du Soleil et de celle de la Lune. Pour y parvenir, 
il eiit suffi de raettre k I'origine la Lune en opposition avec le Soleil 
dans le plan m6me de I'ecliptique, k une distance egale k la centieme 

Eartie de la distance de la Terre au Soleil, et de donner k la Lune et k 
I Terre des vitesses parallel es et proportionnelles ^ leurs distances ik 



158 COSMOS. 

of the attractive force which she exercises in common with 
the Sun, excites motion in our ocean — the liquid portion of 
the Earth — gradually changes the surface by periodical floods, 
and the outlines of continental coasts, by the destructive agen- 
cy of the tides, hinders or favors the labor of men ; afibrds 
the greater part of the material from which sandstones and 
conglomerates are formed, and which are again covered by 
the rounded, loose, transported detritus.^ Thus the Moon, 
as one of the sources of motion, continues to act upon the ge- 
ognostic relations of our planet. The indisputable! influence 

cet astre. Alors la Lune, sans cesse eu opposition au Soleil, eAt decrit 
autour de lui une ellipse semblable k celle de la Terre ; ces deux astres 
86 seraient succede I'un a I'autre sur I'horizon ; et comme k cette dis- 
tance la Lune n'efit point 6te 6clipsee, sa lumiere aurait certainement 
remplace celle du Soleil." " Several partisans of final causes have im- 
agined that the Moon has been given to the Earth to light it during the 
night ; in that case, nature would not have attained the object which 
she had proposed, because we are frequently deprived at the same time 
of the light of the Sun and Moon. To have attained this end, it would 
have been sufBcient in the beginning to place the Moon in opposition 
with the Sun, in the same plane of the ecliptic, at a distance equal to 
the. hundredth part of the distance of the Earth from the Sun, and to 
give to the Moon and the Earth velocities parallel and proportional to 
their distances from that body. Then the Moon, constantly in opposi 
tion to the Sun, would have described an ellipse round it like that of 
the Earth ; these two bodies would have succeeded each other in the 
horizon, and as at that distance the Moon would never have been 
eclipsed, its light would certainly have replaced that of the Sun." Liou- 
ville finds, on the contrary, " Que, si la Lune avait occupe k I'oiigine la 
position particuliere que I'illustre auteur de la Micanique Celeste lui 
dssigne, elle n'aurait pu s'y njaintenir que pendant un temps tres court." 
'* That if the Moon had occupied at the beginning the particular posi- 
tion assigned to her by the illustrious author of the Micanique Cilesle, 
she would not have been able to maintain it for more than a very short 
time." 

* On the Transporting Power of the Tides, see Sir Henry de la Beche, 
Geological Manual, 1833, p. 111. 

t Arago, Sur la question de savoir si la Lune exerce sur notre Atmo- 
sphere une injluence appreciable, in the Annuaire for 1833, p. 157-206. 
The principal advocates of this opinion are Scheibler ( Untersuch. uber 
Einfluss des Mondes anf die Vcranderungenin unserer Atmosphdre, 1830, 
p. 20); Flangergues {Zwanzigjdhrige Beobachtungen in Viviers, Bibl. 
Universelle, Sciences et Arts; torn, xl., 1829, p. 265-283, and in Kastncr's 
Archivf. die ges. Naturlehre, bd. xvii., 1829, sees. 32-50); and Eisenlohr 
(Toggend., Annalen der Physih, bd. xxxv., 1835, p. 141-160, and 309- 
329). Sir John Herschel considers it very probable that a very high 
temperature prevails upon the Moon (far above the boiling-point of 
water), as the surface is uninterruptedly exposed for fourteen days to 
the full action of the Sun. Therefore, in the opposition, or some few 
days after, the Moon must be, in some small degree, a source of heat 
for the Earth ; but this heat, radiating from a body far below the tem- 
[•erature of ignition, can not reach the surface of the Earth, since it ia 



MARS. * 159 

of tlie satellite upon atmospheric pressure, aqueous depositions, 
and the dispersion of clouds, will be treated of in the last and 
purely telluric part of the Cosmos. 

Mars. 

The diameter of this planet, notwithstanding its considera- 
bly greater distance from the Sun, is only 0*5 19 of the Earth's, 
or 3568 geographical miles. The eccentricity of his orbit is 
0-0932168, next to Mercury the greatest of all the planetary 
orbits ; and also on this account, as well as from its proximi- 
ty to the Earth, the most suitable for Kepler's great discove- 
ry of the elliptical form of the planetary orbits. His period 
of rotation^ i^, according to Miidler and Wilhelm Beer, 24h. 
37m. 23s. His sidereal revolution round the Sun occupies 1 
year 321d. I7h. 30m. 41s. The inclination ofMars's orbit 
toward the Earth's equator is 24° 44' 24"; his mass, ^^.^1--^; 
his density, in comparison to that of the Earth, 0-958. The 
mass of Mars will be hereafter corrected by means of the dis 
turbances which he may experience from his influence with 
the Comet of DeYico, in the same way that the close approach 
of Encke's Comet was taken advantage of to ascertain the 
mass of Mercury. 

The flattenmg of Mars, which (singularly enough) the great 
Konigsberg astronomer permanently doubted, was first recog- 
nized by William Herschel (1784). With regard to the amount 
)f the flattening, however, there was long considerable uncer- 

'xbsorbed in the upper strata of our atmosphei'e, where it converts visi- 
ble clouds into transparent vapor." The phenomenon of the rapid dis- 
persion of clouds by the full Moon, when they are not extremely dense, 
is considered by Sir John Herschel " as a meteorological fact, which," 
he adds, "is confirmed by Humboldt's own experience and the uni- 
versal belief of the Spanish sailors in the tropical seas of Arherica." — 
See Report of the Fifteenth Meeting of the British Association for the 
Advancement of Science, 1846, Notices, p. 5 ; and Outlines, p. 201. 

* Beer and Madler, Beitrdge zur Phys. Kenntniss des Sonnensystems, 
1841, p. 113, from observations in 1830 and 1832 ; Madler, Astronomie, 
1849, p. 206. The first considerable improvement in the data for the 
period of rotation, which Dominique Cassini found 24h, 40m., was the 
result of laborious observations by William Herschel (between 1777 and 
1781), which gave24h. 39m. 21-7s. Kunowsky found, in 1821, 24h. 36m. 
403., very near to Madler's result. Cassini's oldest observation of the 
rotation of a spot upon Mars (Delambre, Hist, de VAstron. Mod., torn. 
:i.,p. 694) appears to have been soon after the year 1670; but in the 
very rare Treatise, Kern, Diss, de Scintitlatione Stellarum, Wittenb., 
1686, § 8, 1 find that the actual discoverers of the rotations of Mars and 
Jupiter are stated to have been " Salvator Serra and Father ^gidius 
Franciscus de Cottignez, astronomex-s of the Collegio Romano." 



160 ' COSMOS. 

tainty. It was stated by William Herschel to be j\ ; accord* 
ing to Arago's more accurate measurement,^ with one of E,o- 
chon's prismatic telescopes, in the first instance (before 1824), 
only in the proportion of 189 : 194, i. e., -^^.^ ; by a subsequent 
measurement (1847), J^; still, Arago is inclined to consider 
the flattening somewhat greater. 

If the study of the Moon's surface calls to mind many ge- 
agnostic relations of the surface of the Earth, so, on the con- 
trary, the analogies which Mars presents with the Earth are 
entirely of a meteorological nature. Besides the dark spots 
— some of which are blackish ; others, though in very small 
numbers, yellowish-red, f and surrounded by the greenish con- 
trast colors, so-called seasj — there are seen upon the disk of 
Mars two white, brilliant, snow-like spots, § either at the poles 
which are determined by the axis of rotation, or at the poles 
of cold alternately. They were recognized as early as 1716 
by Philip Maraldi, though their connection with climatic 
changes upon the planet was first described by the elder 
Herschel, in the seventy-fourth volume of the Philosophical 
Transactions for 1784. The white spots become alternately 
larger or smaller, according as the poles approach their win- 
ter or summer. Arago has measured, by means of his polari- 
scope, the intensity of the light of these snoiv zones, and found 
it twice as great as that of the remaining part of the disk. 
The Physikalisch-astronomischen Beitrdgen of Madler and 
Beer contain some excellent graphic representations!! of the 
north and south hemispheres of Mars ; and this remarkable 
phenomenon, unparalleled throughout the whole planetary 
system, is there investigated with reference to all the changes 
of seasons, and the powerful action of the polar summer upon 
the melting snow. Careful observations, during a period of 
ten years, have also taught us that the dark spots upon Mars 
preserve a constant form and relative position. The period- 
ical formation of snow-spots, as meteoric depositions depend- 
ent upon change of temperature, and some optical phenom- 
ena which the dark spots present as soon as they have, by the 
rotation of the planet, reached the edge of the disk, make the 
existence of an atmosphere upon Mars more than probable. 

* Laplace, Expos, du Syst. du Monde, p. 36. Schr6ter's very imper- 
fect measurement of the diameter of the planet gave Mars a flattening 
of only -gL.. t Beer and Madler, Beiirage, p. Ill 

t Sir John Herschel, Outlines, $ 510. 

$ Beer and Madler, Beitrdge, p. 117-125. 

\ Madler, in Schumachei's Astr, Nachr., No. 192. 



THE SMALL PLANETS. IGl 



The Small Planets. 



We have already, in the general consideration'*' of the 
planetary bodies, characterized the group of small planets 
{asteroids, planetoids, co-planets, telescopic or ultra-zodiacal 
planets) under the name of an intermediate group, which, 
to a certain extent, forms a zone of separation between the 
four interior planets (Mercury, Venus, the Earth, and Mars), 
and the four exterior planets of our solar system (Jupiter, Sat- 
urn, Uranus, and Neptune). Their most distinctive features 
consist in their interlaced, greatly inclined, and extremely ec- 
centric orbits ; their extraordinary smallness, as the diameter 
of Vesta does not appear to equal even the fourth part of the 
diameter of Mercury. When the first volume of the Cosmos 
appeared (1845), only four of the small planets were known : 
Ceres, Pallas, Juno, and Vesta, discovered by Piazzi, Olbers, 
and Harding (between January 1, 1801, and March 29, 1807) ; 
at the present time (July, 1851), the number of the small 
planets has already increased to 14 ; they form numerically 

* Cosmos, vol. iv., p. 101. With regard to the chronology of the dis- 
coveries of the small planets, compare p. 100 and 131 ; their relations 
of magnitude to the meteor-asteroids (aerolites), p. 105. With respect 
to Kepler's conjecture of the existence of a planet in the great chasm 
between Mars and Jupiter — a conjecture, hov^rever, w^hich by no means 
led to the discovery of the first of the small planets ( Ceres), compare p. 
111,116, and 117, note t. The bitter reproach which has been thrown 
upon a highly esteemed philosopher, " because at a time when he might 
have known of Piazzi's discovery certainly five months before, but was 
unacquainted with it, he denied not so much the probability, as much 
more the necessity of a planet being situated between Mars and Jupi- 
ter," appears to me to be little justifiable. Hegel, in his Dissertatio de 
Orbitis Planetarum, composed in the spring and summer of 1801, treats 
of the ideas of the ancients of the distances of the planets ; and when 
he quotes the arrangement of which Plato speaks in the Timceus (p. 

35, Steph.), 1.2. 3. 4. 9. 8. 27 (compare Cosmos, vol. iv., p. 

109, note X), he denies the necessity of a chasm. He says only, "Quae 
series « verior naturce ordo git, quam arithmetica progressio, inter quar- 
tum et quintum locum magnum esse spatium, neque ibi planetam de- 
siderari apparet." " If the order of nature is more precise tiian an 
arithmetical progression, there appears to be a great space between 
the fourth and fifth place, and that no planet is required there." (He- 
gel's WerTce, bd. xvi., 1834, p. 28; and Hegel's Leben von Rosenkranz , 
1844, p. 154.) Kant, in his ingenious work, Naturgeschichte desHim- 
mels, 1755, says merely that at the time of the fonnation of the planets, 
Jupiter occasioned the smallness of Mars by the enormous attractive 
force which the former possessed. He only once mentions, and then 
'n a very indecisive manner, " the members of the solar system which 
are situated far from each other, and between which the intermediate 
parts have not yet been discovered." Immanuel Kant, SdmmtlichA 
Werke, th. vi., 1833 p. 87, 110, and 1913.) 



?62 COSMOS 

the thiid part of all the 43 known planetary bodies, i. 0., of 
all principal and secondary planets. 

Although the attention of astronomers was long directed 
m the solar regions to increasing the number of the members 
of partial systems — the Moons which revolve round principal 
planets — and to the planets to be discovered in the furthest 
regions beyond Saturn and Uranus, now, since the accidental 
discovery of Ceres by Piazzi, and especially since the foreseen 
discovery of Astrea by Encke, as well as the great improve- 
ments in the star-charts* (those of the Berlin Academy con- 
tain all stars as far as the 9th, and partly to the 10th mag- 
nitudes), a nearer space presents to us the richest, and per- 
haps inexhaustible field for astronomical industry. It is an 
especial merit of the Astronomischeii Jahrbuch, which is 
published in my native town by Encke, the Director of the 
Berlin Observatory, with the assistance of Dr. Wolfers, that 
the ephemerides of the increasing host of small planets are 
treated of with particular completeness. Up to the present 
time, the region nearest to the orbit of Mars appears to be 
the most filled ; but the breadth of this measured zone is in 
itself more considerable than the distance of Mars from the 
Sun,t " when the difierence of the radii-vectores in the near- 
est perihelion (Victoria) and the most distant aphelion (Hy- 
giea) is taken into consideration." 

The eccentricities of the orbits, of which those of Ceres, 
Egeria, and Yesta are the smallest, and Juno, Pallas, and 
Iris the greatest, have already been alluded to$ above, as 
well as their degrees of inclination toward the ecliptic, which 
decreases from Pallas (34° 37') and Egeria (16° 33') to Hy- 
giea (3° 47'). A tabular view of the elements of the small 
planets follows here, for which I am indebted to my friend 
Dr. Galle. 

* With regard to the influence of improved star-charts upon the dis- 
eovery of the small planets, see Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 116. 

t D'Arrest, Ueber das System der Kleinen Planeten zwischen Mara mu- 
fupiter, 1851, p. 8. X Cosmos, vol. iv., p. 102 and 172. 



THE SMALL PLANETS. 



163 



^ 



1 




u^ 


To 


ft* 


O 


?- 


•^ 


Tf 


r» 








^ 








1 


CO 


I-l 
b 


1 






tu 


















^ 




o 


^ 


^ 


■«J&lt; 


^ 


CO 


gj 


«o 


1 


1 




&amp; 




1 


1 




di 


b 


i 


i 




o 


o 


b 




^ 


i 


1 

b 




w 


Q 


l-H 




00 




*^ 


&lt;.. 








o 


b 


o 


ih 


^5 


on 


J^ 


j_ 


1 




1 


r-i 

O 

a 

3 




s 


§ 


3 


Ci 


i. 






&gt;-» 
























lO 


b 


;_, 


Jo 




m 




:? 






















1 


l-H 


&gt;, 

'^ 


S5 


s 


1 


8&gt; 




t 


b 


K 




c,- 


o 


§J 






1 


1 


^ 
^ 


1 


t 


^ 


I— 1 


is 


i^ 


rH 




■^ 










s 






















lO 


R 


J? 


g? 


b 


S 




f2 


tS 


i 
1 


i 




1 


i-l 


o 


a 


1 


di 


b 


lO 


g 

1 


i 


o 


S 

S 


CO 




1^ 


1 


CJ 


1 


rH 






•-3 


CD 


?^ 


^ 


N 


lO 


a&gt; 


CO 


« 


1 

B5 


i 


o 

CO 


3 


1 


o 


tf) 




b 


"1 


rA 
00 


1 




o 
I- 


Si 
S 


^ 
a 


? 


6t 


b 


g 
S 






^ 


n 


^ 


•^ 


^ 


?? 


^ 


05 


t3 


•| 


i-l 


o 


1 


o 

■&lt;1« 




8&gt; 


05 




i 


1 


&gt;^ 




OJ 


^ 


li 


^^ 


00 


S 


ct 


^ 


y 


s 


1 


1 




1 


R 


g 


S 






« 




o 


00 

1— 1 


k 


§5 


U 


lo 


en 


C} 

03 


'd 


.a 
&gt; 


M 


4J 

O 


§, 

-* 
c^ 


o 


a 


a 






c5 

b 


" 






?, 


^ 


lO 


CJ 


s? 


^ 


2 


o 


1 


i 


s 


^ 


?, 


R&gt; 


a 




ci 


irt 


(X 


1 




CO 


rH 




s 


u 


b 


"^ 




1 


H 


•^ 


t: 


a 


.^ 


s. 


(H 


© 


&amp; 



S 6 S 

tJ a3T3 



'5b.2 ^ 
S » .2 

in 

J 2 '^ 

— &lt;s S? 
© a 2 

III 

t:6 ° 

© -d 
So© 

©n3 '-' 
^ 13 .- 

&gt;§:§ 

O © H 



'•5 "3 



So S 

go© 

1§!. 

•^ ^ o 
-u ;::: t« G4 

£ fe ©-5 
£ © .0 

^ 2 « 

^22 



164 COSMOS 

The aisoovery of a fifteenth new planet (Eunomia) hat 
just been announced. It was discovered by De Gasparis 
upon the 19th of July, 1851. The elements, which have 
been calculated by Riimker, are the following : 

Epoch of mean longitude in mean Greenwich time. ) o t 1 -f) 

Mean longitude 321° 25' 29" 

Longitude of perihelion 27 35 38 

Longitude of ascending node 293 52 55 

Inclination 11 48 43 

Eccentricity 0-188402 

Half major axis 2-64758 

Mean of motion 823-C30 

Period of revolution 1574 days. 

The mutual relation of the orbits of the asteroids and the 
enumeration of the individual pairs of orbits has been made 
the subject of acute investigation, first by Gould^ in 1848, and 
more recently by D'Arrest. The latter says, " The strongest 
evidence of the intimate connection of the whole group of 
small planets appears to be, that if the orbits are supposed to 
be represented materially as hoops, they all hang together in 
such a manner that the whole group may be replaced by an^ 
given one. If it so happened that Iris, which Hind discov- 
ered in August, 1847, was still unknown, as many other bod- 
ies in this region certainly are, the group would consist of two 
separate parts — a result which must appear so much the more 
unexpected, as the zone which these orbits occupy in the solar 
system is wide."t 

We can not take leave of this wonderful group of planets 
without mentioning, in this fragmentary enumeration of the 
individual members of the solar system, the bold view of a 
gifted and deeply investigating astronomer as to the origin of 
the asteroids and their intersecting orbits. A result deduced 
from the calculations of Gauss, that Ceres approaches extreme- 
ly near to Pallas in her ascending passage through the plane 
of that planet's orbit, led Olbers to form the conjecture that 
" both planets, Ceres and Pallas, maybe fragments of a sin- 
gle large principal planet which has been destroyed by some 
natural force, and formerly occupied the gap between Mars 
and Jupiter, and that the discovery of an additional number 
of similar fragments which describe elliptical orbits round the 
Sun, in the same region, may be expected."! 

* Benjamin Althorpe Gould (now at Cambridge, Massachusetts, 
U. S.), Untersuchungen uber die gegeruseitige Lage der Bahnen zwischen 
Mars und Jupiter, 1848, p. 9-12. t D'Arrest, op. cit., p. 30. 

X Zach, Monatl. Ccrresp., bd&gt; vi., p. 88. 



JUPITER. 165 

The possibility of determining by calculation, even approx- 
imatively, the epoch of such a cosmical event, which it is sup- 
posed would be at the same time the epoch of the formation 
of the small planets, remains more than doubtful, from the 
complication produced by the already large number of the 
" fragments" known, the peculiar retrogression of the apsides, 
and motion of the nodes.* Olbers describes the region of the 
nodes of the orbits of Ceres and Pallas as corresponding to 
the northern wing of the Virgin and the constellation of the 
Whale. Certainly Juno was discovered in the latter by 
Harding, though accidentally, in the construction of a star- 
catalogue, scarcely two years after the discovery of Pallas, 
and even Yesta in the latter, after a long search during five 
years, conducted upon hypothesis. This is not the place to 
determine whether these results alone are sufficient to estab- 
lish the hypothesis. The cometary clouds, in which the small 
planets were at first supposed to be enveloped, have disap- 
peared on investigation with more perfect instruments. The 
considerable changes of light to which they were said to be 
^ibject were ascribed by Olbers to their irregular figure as 
oeing " fragments of a single destroyed planet."! 

Jupiter. 

The mean distance of Jupiter from the Sun, expressed in 
fractional parts of the Earth's distance from the central body, 
amounts to 5-202767. The true mean diameter of this plan- 
et, the largest of all, is 77,176 geographical miles; equal, 
therefore, to 1 1-255 terrestrial diameters, about one fifth great- 
er than the diameter of the more remote Saturn. His side- 
real revolution occupies lly. 314d. 20h. 2m. 7s. 

The flattening of Jupiter, according to the measurements 
by Arago with the prismatic micrometer (which were intro- 
duced into the Exposition du Systeme du Monde, p. 38), 
is as 167 : 177, consequently y|.y, which agrees very closely 
with the later determination (1839) of Beer and Madler,t 

• Gauss, Monatl. Corresp., bd. xxvi., p. 299. 

t Mr. Daniel Kirkwood (of the Pottsville Academy) has ventured 
upon the undertaking of restoring the exploded primitive planet from 
the fragmentary remains in the saitie manner as the animals of the prim- 
itive Earth. He finds for it a diameter greater than Mars (of more 
than 4320 geographical miles), and the slowest rotation of all the priu- 
cipal planets — a length of day of fifty-seven hours and a half. (Report 
of the British Assoc, 1850, p. xxxv.) 

}. Beer and Madler, Beitrdge zur Phys. Kenntniss der Himl. Korpevt 
p. 104-106. Older and le*.s certain observations by Hussey gave ^^. 



166 COSMOS. 

^^ho found the flattening to "be between yi if and ^| g. Han- 
sen and Sir John Herschel give the preference to Jj. The 
earliest observation of the flattening, by Dominique Cassini, 
is older than the year 1666, as I have already pointed out 
elsewhere. This circumstance has an especial historical im« 
portance, on account of the influence which, according to Sir 
David Brewster's acute remark, the discovery of this flatten- 
ing by Cassini exercised upon Newton's ideas as to the figure 
of the Earth. The Frincipia PhilosophicB Naturalis bears 
witness to this, but the epochs at which the Principia and 
Cassini's observation of equatorial and polar diameters of 
Jupiter appeared, might excite chronological doubts.* 

As the mass of Jupiter after that of the Sun is the most 
important element of the whole planetary system, its accurate 
determination, which has recently been effected through the 
disturbances of Juno and Vesta, as well as by the elongation 
of his satellites, especially the fourth,! must be considered as 
one of the most productive improvements of calculating astron- 
omy. The valua of the mass of Jupiter is greater now than 
formerly ; that of Mercury, on the contrary, smaller. The 
former, together with that of the four satellites, is to4 7^T9' 
while Laplace gave it as yoeVog-^ 

Jupiter's period of rotation is, according to Airy, 9h. 55' 
21 "-3 mean solar time. Dominique Cassini first found it 
(1665) to be between 9h. 55m. and 9h. 56in., by means of a 
spot which was visible^ for many years, even indeed to 1691, 
and was always of the same color and outline. Tho greater 
part of these spots are of greater blackness than the streaks 
upon Jupiter. They do not, however, appear to belong to 

Laplace {Syst. du Monde, p. 266) found it theoretically between -^^ 
and -^^j with increasing density of the strata. 

* Newton's immortal work, Philosophice Naturalis Principia Mathe 
matica, appeared as early as May, 1687, and the papers of the Paris 
Academy did not contain the notice of Cassini's determination of the 
flattening (y^^) until the year 1691 ; so that Newton, who might cer- 
tainly have known of Richer's pendulum-experiment at Cayenne, fronr 
the account of the journey printed in 1679, must have become acquaint- 
ed with the configuration of Jupiter by verbal intercourse and the act- 
ive correspondence of that time. With regard to this subject, and tho 
only apparent early acquaintance of Huygens with the pendulum-ex 
periment of Richer, compare Cosmos, vol. i., p. 165, note, and vol. ii., 
p. 146, note. 

t Airy, in the Mem. of the Royal Astron. Soc., vol, ix., p. 7 ; vol. x., 
p. 43. 

t As early as the year 1824. (Laplace, op. cit., p. 207.) 

$ Delambre, /fW. de t Astron. Mod., torn, ii., p. 754. 



JUPITER. 167 

the surface of the planet itself, as they sometimes have a dif- 
ferent velocity from that of the equatorial regions. Accord- 
ing to a very experienced observer, Heinrich Schwahe, of Des- 
sau, the dark, more sharply-bounded spots have been several 
years in succession exclusively peculiar to the two gray gir 
dies bordering upon the equator, sometimes the north and 
sometimes the south. The process of spot-formation is, there- 
fore, locally variable. Schwabe's observations, made in No- 
vember, 1834, likewise show, that the spots on Jupiter, seen 
with a 280-fold magnifying power in a Fraunhofer telescope, 
sometimes resemble the small nucleoid spots surrounded by 
a halo upon the Sun. But still their darkness is less than 
that of the satellite shadows. The nucleus is probably a part 
of the body of Jupiter itself, and if the atmospheric opening 
remains fixed above the same spot, the motion of the spots 
gives the true rotation. They also separate sometimes, like 
the Sun-spots, as Dominique Cassini discovered as early as 
1665. 

In the equatorial zone of Jupiter are situated two broad 
principal streaks or girdles, of a gray or grayish-brown col- 
or, which become paler toward the edges, and finally disap- 
pear entirely. Their boundaries are very irregular and va- 
riable ; both are separated by an intermediate bright equa- 
torial streak. Toward the poles, also, the whole surface is cov- 
ered with numerous, narrower, paler, frequently interrupted, 
even finely branched streaks, always parallel to the equator. 
*' These phenomena," says Arago,^ "are most easily explain- 

* " On salt qii'il existe au-dessus et au-dessous de I'equateur de Ju- 
piter deux baiides moins brillantes que la surface generale. Si on les 
examine avec une lunette, elles paraissent moins distinctes el mesure 
qu'elles s'eloiment du centre, et m6me elles deviennent tout-4-fait in- 
visibles pres des bords de la planete. Toutes ces apparences s'expli- 
quent en admettant I'existence d'une atmosphere de nuages inter- 
rompue aux environs de I'equateur par une zone diaphane, produite 
peut-etre par les vents alises, L'atmosphere de nuages reflechissaut 
plus de lumi^re que le corps solide de Jupiter, les parties de ce corps 
que Ton verra k travers la zone diaphane, auront moins d'eclat que le 
reste et formeront les bandes obscures. A mesure qu'on s'eloignera du 
centre, le rayon visuel de I'observateur traversera des epaisseurs de plus 
en plus grandes da la zone diaphane, en sorte qu'jl la lumiere reflechie 
par le corps solide de la planete s'ajoutera la lumiere reflechie par cett» 
/one plus epaisse. Les bandes sei'ont par cette raison moins obscures 
en s'eloignant du centre. Enfin aux bords memes la lumidre reflechie 
par la zone vue dans la plus grande epaisseur pourra faire disparaitre la 
difference d'intensite qui existe entre les quantit^s de lumiere reflechie 
par la planete et par l'atmosphere de nuages; on cessera alors d'aper 
cevoir les bandes qui n'oxistent qu'en vertu de cette difference. Oo 



168 COSMOS". 

able by assuming the existence of an atmosphere partially 
condensed by strata of clouds, in which, however, the region 
resting upon the equator is free from vapor and diaphanous 
probably in consequence of the trade-winds. Since, as Will- 
iam Herschel already assumed in a treatise in the 83d vol. 
of the Philosophical Transactions, which appeared in 1793, 
the cloud-surface reflects a more intense light than the sur- 
face of the planet, so that part of the ground which we see 
through the clearer air must have less light (appear darker) 
than the strata of clouds reflecting large quantities of light. 
On that account gray (dark) and clear bands alternate with 
each other ; the former appear so much the less dark-colored 
in proportion to the distance from the center, when, the visual 
radius of the observer being directed obliquely toward the edge 
of the planet, at a small angle, they are seen through a larger 
and thicker mass of atmosphere, reflecting more light. 

observe dans les pays de montagnes quelque chose d'analogue : quand 
on se trouve pres d'un for^t de sapin, elle paralt noire ; mais k mesure 
qu'on s'en 61oigne, les couches d'atmosph^re interposees deviennent de 
plus en plus epaisses et reflechissent de la lumiere. La difference de 
teinte entre la foret et les objets voisins diminue de plus en plus, elle 
finit par se confondre avec eux, si I'on s'en eloigne d'une distance con- 
venable." (From Arago's Reports on Astronomy, 1841.) " It is known 
that there exist above and below^ the equator of Jupiter two bands less 
brilliant than the general surface. If these are examined with a tel- 
escope, they appear less distinct in proportion as the distance from the 
center increases, and they even become quite invisible near the edges 
of the planet. All these appearances may be explained by admitting 
the existence of an atmosphere of clouds, internipted near the equatot 
by a transparent zone, produced, perhaps, by the trade-winds. The at- 
mosphere of clouds reflects more light than the solid body of Jupiter. 
Those parts of him which are seen through the transparent zone would 
have less brightness than the remainder, and would form obscure bands. 
In proportion as the distance from the center increases, the visual ray 
of the observer traverses greater and greater thicknesses of the trans 
parent zone, in such a way that to the light reflected by the solid body 
of the planet is added the light reflected by the denser zone. The 
bands would be, from this reason, less obscure the greater the distance 
from the center. Finally, at the very edges of the planet's disk, the 
light reflected by the zone, seen in its greatest thickness, would cause 
the difference of intensity which existed between the quantities of light 
reflected by the planet and by the atmosphere of clouds to disappear, 
and the bands which exist only in virtue of that difference would cease 
to be visible. Something analogous is observed in mountainous coun- 
tries ; in the neighborhood of a forest of fir-trees they appear black, 
but in proportion as the observer removes to a greater distance, the 
interposed atmospheric strata become thicker and thicker, and reflect 
light. The difference of tint between the forest and the objects near 
diminishes more and more, and ends by their being confounded to 
gether on removing to a sufficieut distance." 



THE SATELLITES OF JUPITER. 



169 



The Satellites of Jupiter. 

Even so early as the brilliant epoch of Galileo, the correct 
opinion was formed that the subordinate planetary system 
of Jupiter might present, in many relations of space and time, 
a picture in miniature of the Solar System. This view, rap- 
idly diffused at that time, as well as the discovery, shortly 
afterward, of the phases of Venus (February, 1610), contrib- 
uted greatly to the general introduction of the Copernican 
system. The quadruple group of satellites of Jupiter is the 
only one of the exterior principal planets which has not been 
increased by any new discovery, during a period of nearly 
two centuries and a half, since the epoch of their first dis- 
covery by Simon Marius on the 29th of December, 1609. 

The following table contains the periods of sidereal revo- 
lution of the satelhtes of Jupiter, their mean distances ex- 
pressed in diameters of the primary, their diameters in geo- 
graphical miles, and their masses as parts of the mass of 
Jupiter. 



Satellite*. 


Period of Rev- 
olution. 


Distance from 
Jupiter. 


Diameter in 
Geogr. Miles. 


Maes. 


1 
2 
3 
4 


d. h. m. 

1 18 28 

3 13 14 

7 3 14 

16 16 32 


6,049 

9,623 

15,350 

26,998 


2116 
1900 
3104 
2056 


0-0000173281 
0-0000232355 
0-0000884972 
0-0000426591 



•"•^ ToTT-TT 9 expresses the mass of Jupiter with his satel- 
lites, then his mass without the satellites is" TiTT/ojg" ' °^ly 
about eoVo" sinaller. 

The comparisons of the magnitudes, distances, and ec- 
centricities with other satellite systems has already been 
given {Cosmos, vol. iv., p. 105-127). The luminous in- 
tensity of Jupiter's satellites is various, and not in propor- 
tion to their volume, since, as a general rule, the third and 
the frst, whose relation of magnitude is as 8 : 5, appear the 
brightest. The smallest and densest of all — the second — is 
generally brighter than the langcT fourth, which is ordinarily 
called the least luminous. Accidental (temporary) fluctua- 
tions in the luminous intensity have, as already remarked, 
been ascribed sometimes to changes of the surface, sometimes 
to obscurations in the atmosphere of the satellites.* They 
all appear, moreover, to reflect a more intense light than the 
primary. "When the Earth is situated between Jupiter and 
the Sun, and the satellites, therefore, moving from east to 
* Sir John Herschel, Oxtlines, $ 540. 

Vol. IV.— H 



170 COSMOS. 

west; apparently enter on the eastern edge of Jupiter, they 
hide from us, in their passage, successive portions of the disk 
of their primary, and can be perceived with telescopes of 
moderate pow^er, since they stand out in lumhious relief 
from the disk. The visibility of the satellite is attended 
with more difficulty the nearer it approaches the center of 
the primary. From this phenomenon, which was early ob- 
served. Pound, Newton's and Bradley's friend, inferred that 
the disk was less luminous near the edge than at the center. 
Arago considers that this assumption, renewed by Messier, 
involves difficulties which can only be solved by new and 
more delicate observations. Jupiter was seen without any 
satellites by Molyneux in November, 1681 ; by Sir William 
Herschel on the 23d of May, 1802 ; and, lastly, by Griesbach, 
on the 27th of September, 1843. Such a non- visibility of the 
satellites has reference, however, to the space without the 
disk of Jupiter, and is not inconsistent with the theorem that 
all the four satellites can not be eclipsed at one time. 

Saturn. 

The period of sidereal or true revolution of Saturn is 29y. 
166d. 23h. 16m. 32s. His mean diameter is 62,028 geo- 
graphical miles, equal to 9022 terrestrial diameters. The 
period oi rotation, deduced from the observation of some dark 
spots (knot-like condensations of the bands) upon the surface,* 
is lOh. 29m. 17s. Such a great velocity of rotation corre- 
sponds to the considerable ^«^^em?^g•. William Herschel esti- 
mated it, in 1776, at -^^.^ ; Bessel, after corresponding observ- 
ations during a period of more than three years, found that at 

* The earliest and careful observations of William Herschel, in No- 
vember, 1793, gave for Saturn's period of rotation lOh. 16m. 44s. It 
has been incorrectly attributed to the great philosopher, Immanuel 
Kant, that he conjectured the period of Saturn's rotation from theo- 
retical considerations in his Allgemeincn Naturgeschichte des Himmels, 
forty years before Herschel. The number that he gives is 6h. 23m. 
53s. He calls his determination " the mathematical calculation of an 
unknown motion of a heavenly body, which is, perhaps, the only pre- 
diction of that kind in pure Natural Philosophy, and awaits confirma- 
tion at a future period." This confirmation of his conjecture did not 
take place at all ; observations have shown an error of f of the whole, 
i. e., of four hours. In the same work it is said respecting the ring of 
Saturn,. " that in the aggregation of particles which constitute it, those 
of the inner edge complete their revolution in 10 hours, those of tho 
external edge in 15 hours. The first of these ring-numbers is the only 
one which accidentally comes near the planet's observed period of ro- 
tation (lOd. 29m. 17s.). Compare Kant, Sdmmtlicke Werke, th. vir., 1389 
p. 135 and 140. 



SATURN. 171 

a mean distance the polar diameter was 15"-381 ; the equato- 
rial diameter 17"-053, consequently a flattening of y^ 3 .^ The 
body of the planet has also ribbon-like stripes, which are, how- 
ever, less perceptible, though, at the same time, rather broader 
than those of Jupiter. The most constant of them is a gray 
equatorial stripe. Next to this follow several others, but 
with variable forms, indicating an atmospheric origin. Will- 
iam Herschel did not always find them parallel to the rings, 
neither do they extend as far as the poles. The region round 
the poles presents a very remarkable phenomenon, a change 
in the reflection of light which is dependent upon Saturn's 
seasons. This region is more brightly luminous in Avinter, a 
phenomenon which calls to mind the variable snow-region of 
Mars, and did not escape the penetration of William Herschel, 
Whether such an increase of luminous intensity is to be as- 
cribed to the temporary formation of ice and snow, or to an 
extraordinary accumulation of clouds,! it is still indicative of 
the action of changes in temperature, and of the existence of 
an atmosphere. 

We have already stated the mass of Saturn to be ^iItq • 
it, together with the enormous volume of the planet (its diam- 
eter is I of the diameter of Jupiter), leads us to infer a very 
small density decreasing toward the surface. If the density 
were quite homogeneous (yVo of that of water), the flattening 
would be still greater. 

The planet is surrounded in the plane of its equator with 
at least two fully suspended and extremely thin rings, both 
situated in the same plane. Their luminous intensity is great- 
er than that of Saturn itself, and the outer ring is still brightei 
than the inner.$ The division of the ring seen by Huygens 
in 1655, as a single one,§ was indeed observed by Dominique 

* Laplace {Expos, du Syst. du Monde, p. 43) estimates the flattening 
at JL. The extraordinary deviation of Saturn from the spheroidal fig 
ure, according to which William Herschel, after a series of laborious 
observations, made with very different telescopes, found the major axis 
of the planet, not in the equator itself, but in a diameter which inter- 
sected the equatorial diameter at an angle of about 45°, was not con- 
firmed by Bessel, but found to be incorrect. 

t Arago, Annuaire for 1842, p. 555. 

X This difference in the luminous intensity of the outer and inner 
rings was also stated by Domini(^ue Cassini {M6m. de VAcad&amp;mie dea 
Sciences, annee, 1715, p. 13). 

$ Cosmos, vol. ii., p. 323. The public announcement of the discovery, 
or, rather, the complete explanation of all the phenomena which are 
presented by Saturn and his ring, did not take place until the year 
1659, four years afterward, in the Sy sterna SatumiTim. 



172 COSMOS. 

Cassiniin 1 675, but first accurately described by William Her 
schel in 1789-1792. Since Short's time the outer has been 
found to be streaked by numerous fine stripes, but these lines 
or stripes have never been constant. Very recently, during 
the latter months of the year 1850, a third very pale, feebly 
luminous, and darker ring has been discovered between the 
planet and the ring hitherto called the inner one. The dis- 
covery was made nearly simultaneously by Bond, at Cam- 
bridge (U. S.), on the 11th of November, by means of the 
great refractor of Mertz with a fourteen-inch object-glass, and 
by Dawes, near Maidstone, on the 25th of November. This 
ring is separated from the second by a black line, and occu- 
pies the third part of the space, between the second ring and 
the body of the planet, which was formerly stated to be va- 
cant, and through which Derham affirmed that he saw small 
stars. 

The dimensions of the divided ring of Saturn have been de- 
termined by Bessel and Struve. According to the latter, the 
exterior diameter of the outer ring, at Saturn's mean distance, 
appears to us under an angle 40"'09, equal to 153,200 geo- 
graphical miles ; the interior diameter of the same ring, un- 
der an angle of 35"-29, equal to 134,800 geographical miles. 
For the exterior diameter of the inner (second) ring is ob- 
tained 34"-47 ; for interior diameter of the same ring, 26"-67. 
Struve fixes the space between the last-mentioned ring and 
the surface of the planet at 4"-34. The entire breadth of the 
first and second rings is 14,800 miles; the distance of the 
rings from the surface of Saturn, about 20,000 ; the space 
which separates the first from the second ring, and which 
represents the black line of division seen by Dominique Cas- 
sini, is only 1560 miles. The mass of the rings is, according 
to Bessel, yj-j of the mass of Saturn. They present a few 
elevations^ and irregularities, by means of which it has been 
possible to determine approximatively their period of rotation 
— exactly the same as that of the planet. The irregulari- 
ties of form become perceptible on the disappearance of the 
nngs, when one is generally lost sight of before the other. 

A very remarkable phenomenon was discovered by Schwabe, 
at Dessau, in September, 1827 — the eccentric position of Sat- 
urn. The ring is not concentric with the planet itself, but 

♦ Such mountain-like inequalities of surface have recently been again 
noticed by Lassell in Liverpool, by means of a twenty-feet reflecting 
telescope of his ow^n construction. — Report of the British Associationp 
1850, p. 35. 



SATURN. 173 

the latter is situated somewhat to the westward. This ob- 
servation has been confirmed — partly by micrometi cal meas- 
urements — by Harding, Struve,* John Herschel, and South. 
The small differences in the degree of eccentricity, appearing 
periodically, which result from the corresponding observations 
of Schwabe, Harding, and De Vico in Rome, are perhaps con- 
sequences of oscillations of the center of gravity of the ring 
about the geometrical center of Saturn. It is surprising that, 
so early as the end of the seventeenth century, a priest of 
Avignon, nsLmed Gallet, attempted unsuccessfully to direct 
the attention of astronomers to the eccentric position of Sat- 
urn, t With the extremely minute density of Saturn (per- 
haps scarcely | the density of water) and its decrease toward 
the surface, it is difficult to form a conception of the molecu- 
lar condition or material constitution of the body of the plan- 
et, or even to decide whether this constitution actually pre- 
supposes fluidity, i. e., mobility of the smallest particles, or 
solidity, according to the frequently adduced analogies of 
pine wood, pumice-stone, cork, or a solidified liquid — ice. 
Horner, the astronomer of the Krusenstern expedition, calls 
the ring of Saturn a train of clouds ; he maintains that the 
mountains of Saturn consist of masses of vapor.$ Conjec- 
tural astronomy exercises here an unrestricted and tolerated 
play. Of an entirely different nature are the serious specu- 
lations of two distinguished American astronomers. Bond and 
Peirce, as to the possible stability of Saturn's rings, founded 
upon observations and the analytical calculus. § Both agree 

* Compare Harding's Kleine Ephemeriden for 1835, p. 100; and 
S*.ruve, in Schumacher's Astr. Nachr., No. 139, p. 389. 

t la the Aciis Eruditorum pro anno 1684, p. 424, is an extract from 
the Systema PhcEuomenorum, Saturni, autore Galletio, proposito eccl. 
Avenionensis : " Nonnuuquam corpus Saturni non exacie annuli medium 
obtinere visum fuit. Hinc evenit, ut, quum planeta orientalis est, cen- 
trum ejus extremitati orientali annuh propius videatur, et major pars 
ab occidentali latere sit cum ampliore obscuritate." "Sometimes the 
mass of Saturn appeared not to reach exactly the middle of his ring. 
Hence it happens that when that planet is in the east, his center appears 
nearer to the eastern extremity of the ring, and the greater part is away 
from the western side with greater obscurity." 

X Horner, in Gehlen's Neiiem Physik. Wdrterb., bd. viii., 1 836, p. 174. 

§ Benjamin Peirce, On the Constitution of Saturn'' s Rii.g,'\u. Gould's 
Astron. Journal, 1851, vol. ii., p. 16. "The ring consists of a stream 
or of streams of a fluid, rather denser than water, flowing round the 
primary." Compare also Silliman's Amer. Journal, ser. ii., vol. xii,, 
1851, p. 99; and with regard to the superficial inequalities of the ring, 
as well as disturbing and consequently preserving influences of the sat- 
ellites Sir John Herschel, Outlines, p. 320. 



174 



COSMOS. 



in their results in favor of fluidity, as well as continuous vari- 
ability in the figure, and divisibility of the outer ring. The 
permanence of the whole is considered by Peirce as depend- 
ent upon the influence and position of the satellites, because 
without this dependence, even with inequalities in the ring, 
the equilibrium could not be maintained. 

The Satellites of Saturn. 

The five satellites of Saturn which have been known lon- 
gest were discovered between the years 1655 and 1684 (Ti- 
tan, the sixth according to distance, by Huygens ; and four 
by Cassini, viz., Japetus, the outermost of all, Rhea, Tethys, 
and Dione). These were followed by the discovery, by Will- 
iam Herschel, in 1789, of two, Mim^as and Enceladus, situ- 
ated nearest to the planet. Finally, the seventh satellite, 
Hyperion, the last but one according to distance, was dis- 
covered almost simultaneously by Bond, at Cambridge (U. S.), 
and by Lassell at Liverpool, in September, 1848. The rela- 
tive magnitudes and relations of distances in this partial sys- 
tem have been already treated of {Cosmos, vol. i., p. 97 ; 
vol. iv., p. 105-118.) The periods of revolution and the 
mean distances, the latter expressed in fractional parts of the 
equatorial radius of the primary, are, according to the observ- 
ations instituted by Sir John Herschel at the Cape of Good 
H.ope,='^ between 1835 and 1837, the following : 



Satellites according 


Satellites accord- 






to the Order of their 


ing to their Dis- 


Period of Revolution. 


Mean Distance. 


Discovery. 


tances. 






f 


1. Mimas 


22 37 22-9 


3-3607 


g 


2. Enceladus 


1 8 53 6-7 


4-3125 


e 


3. Tethys 


1 21 18 25-7 


5-3396 


d 


4. Dioue 


2 17 41 8-9 


6-8398 


c 


5. Rhea 


4 12 25 10-8 


9-5528 


a 


6. Titan 


15 22 41 25-2 


22-1450 


h 


7. Hyperion 


22 12 ? 


28-0000? 


b 


8. Japetus 


79 7 53 40-4 


64-3590 



Between the first four satellites nearest to Saturn a re- 
markable relation oi commensurability in the period of rev- 
olution presents itself. The period of the third satellite ( Te- 
thys) is double that of the first {Mimas) ; that of the fourth 
(Dione) double that of the second {Enceladus). The close- 

* Sir John Herschel, Results of Astron. Observations at the Cape of 
Good Hope, p. 414-430 ; the same, in the Outlines of Astr., p. 650, and 
apon the law of distances, $ 550. 



URANUS. 175 

ness of this relation extends to ji^ of the longer periods. 
This unnoticed result was communicated to me by Sir John 
Herschel in a letter as long back as 1845. The four satel- 
lites of Jupiter present a certain regularity in their distances, 
forming very nearly the series 3, 6, 12. The distance of the 
second from the first, expressed in diameters of Jupiter, is 
3-6 ; the distance of the third from the second, 5*7 ; that of 
the fourth from the third, 11-6. Moreover, Fries and Chal- 
lis have endeavored to prove the so-called law of Titius in all 
•satellite systems, even in that of Uranus.^ 

Uranus. 

The acknowledged existence of this planet, the great dis- 
covery of William Herschel, has not only increased the num- 
ber of the principal planets known for thousands of years, and 
more than doubled the diameter of the solar regions — it has 
also, after the lapse of sixty-five years, led to the discovery of 
Neptune, through the disturbances which it underwent from 
the influence of the latter. Uranus was discovered accident- 
ally (13th March, 1781), during the examination of a small 
group of stars in Gemini, by its small disk, which, with mag- 
nifying powers of 460 and 932, increased far more consider- 
ably than was the case with other adjacent stars. The saga- 
cious discoverer, so thoroughly acquainted with all optical phe- 
nomena., also observed that the luminous intensity decreased 
considerably in proportion as stronger magnifying powers 
were employed, while in the fixed stars (6th and 7th magni- 
tude) it remained nearer the same. 

When Herschel first announced the existence of Uranus, 
he called it a comet,-f and it was only by the united labors of 
Saron, Lexell, Laplace, and Mechain, which were consider- 
ably facilitated by the discovery made by the meritorious 
Bode, in 1784, of the previous observations of the planet by 
Tobias Mayer (1756) and Flamstead (1690), that the ellip- 
tical orbit of Uranus and the whole of its planetary elements 
were determined with admirable celerity. According to Han- 
sen, the mean distance of Uranus from the Sun is 1,918,239, 
or 1585 million geographical miles; his period of sidereal 
revolution 84y. 5d. 19h. 41m. 36s.; the inclination of his 

orbit to the ecliptic, 0° 46' 28" ; his apparent diameter at 

•&gt; 

* Fries, Vorlesungen iiher die Stemhunde, 1833, p. 325 ; Challis, in the 
Transact, of the Cambridge Philos. Society, vol. iii., p. 171. 

t William Herschel, Account of a Comet in the Philos. Transact, for 
I781,vol, Ixxi., p. 492. 



176 COSMOS. 

the mean distance from the Earth, 9"-9. His ?nass, which 
was determined as y Tj-g-yj from the first observations of the 
BateUites, is, according to Lamont's observations, only 24^0 s &gt; 
consequently his dmisity would be between those of Jupiter 
and Saturn.* A flattening of Uranus was already conjec- 
tured by Herschel from his -observations with magnifying 
powers of from 800 to 2400. According to Madler's meas- 
urements in 1842 and 1843, it would appear to fall between 
y^-Y and g?^.! The original supposition that Uranus had 
two rings was found to be an optical illusion by the discoverer 
himself, in all cases so cautious and persevering in confirming 
his discoveries. 

The Satellites of Uranus. 

" Uranus," says Sir John Herschel, " is attended by satel- 
lites — four, at least, probably five or six." They present a 
great and hitherto unparalleled peculiarity, viz., that while 
all satellites (those of the Earth, of Jupiter, of Saturn), as 
well as all the principal planets, move from west to east, and 
with the exception of a few asteroids, in orbits not much in- 
clined toward the ecliptic, the satellites of Uranus move from 
east to west in orbits which are nearly circular, and form an 
angle of 78° 58' with the ecliptic — ^very nearly perpendicu- 
lar to it. In the case of the satellites of Uranus, as well aa 
those of Saturn, the arrangement and nomenclature, accord- 
ing to their distances from the primary, are to be distin- 
guished from the arrangement according to the epoch of 
discovery. According to a private communication from Six 
John Herschel (November 8th, 1851), Mr. Lassell has dis- 
tinctly observed on the 24th, 28th, and 30th of October, and 
2d of November of the above year, two satellites of Uranus., 
which appear to be situated still nearer to the primary than 
the first satellite observed by Sir William Herschel, to which 
he ascribed a period of revolution of about 5 days and 21 
hours, but which was not recognized. The periods of revo- 
lution of the two satellites now seen by Lassell were near to 
4 and 21 days. Of the satellites of Uranus, the second and 
fourth were first discovered by William Herschel in 1787, 
then the first and fifth in 1790, and, finally, the sixth and 
third in 1794. During the fifty-six years which have elapsed 
since the last discovery *bf a Uranus satellite (the third), the 

* Cosmos, vol. iv., p. 119. 

t Madler, in Schumacher's Astr. Nachr., No. 493. (With regard to 
the flattening of Uranus, compare Arago, Annn,i^re for 1842, p. 577-579.) 



NEPTUNE. 177 

existence of six satellites has frequently "been unjustly doubt- 
ed ; the observations of the last twenty years have gradually 
proved how trustworthy the great discoverer of Slough has 
been in this as in all other branches of planetary astronomy. 
Those satellites of Uranus which have been seen again up to 
this time are the first, second, iourth, and sixth. Perhaps it 
may be ventured to add the third, after the observations of 
Lassell on the 6th of November, 1848. On account of the 
large opening of his reflecting telescope, and the abundance 
of hght thus obtained, the elder Herschel considered that 
with the sharpness of his vision, under favorable atmospheric 
circumstances, a magnifying power of 157 was sufficient ; his 
son recommends, in general, a power of 300 for these ex- 
tremely small luminous disks (luminous points). The second 
and fourth satellites were seen again the earliest, the most 
frequently and positively by Sir John Herschel, from 1828 to 
1834, in Europe and at the Cape of Good Hope, subsequently 
by Lament at Munich and Lassell at Liverpool. The first 
satellite of Uranus was found by Lassell (September 14th to 
November 9th, 1847), and by Otto Struve (October 8th to 
December 10th, 1847). The outermost (the sixth) by La- 
ment (October 1st, 1837). The fifth appears never to have 
been seen again, and the third not satisfactorily enough.^ 
The particulars here put together are not without importance, 
also for the reason that they tend to excite caution in not 
placing too much confidence in so-called negative evidence. 

Neptune. 

The merit of having successfully conducted and announced 
an inverse problem of disturbance, that " of deducing from 
the given disturbances of a known planet the elements of an 
unknown one," and even of having, by a bold prediction, oc- 
casioned the important discovery of Neptune by Galle on the 
23d of September, 1846, belongs to the faculty of acute rea- 
soning and the persevering industry of Leverrier.f This is, 
as Encke expresses himself, the most brilliant of all planeta- 
ry discoveries, because purely theoretical investigations have 
rendered possible the prediction of the existence and the 
place of the new planet. The celerity with which the plan- 

* For the observations of Lassell at Starfield (Liverpool), and of Otta 
Struve, compare Monthly Notices of the Royal Astron. Soc, vol. viii., 
1848, p. 43-47 and 135-139 ; also Schum., Asfr. Nachr., No. 623, p. 3fi5 

t Berhard von Liadenau, Beitrag zur Gcschichte der Neptuns-xhi:- 
deckung, in the supplementary sheet to Schum. Astr. Nachr., ] 849, p i 

H 2 



178 COSMOS. 

et was afterward found was itself favored by the excellent 
star-chart drawn up by Bremiker for the Berlin Academy. =^ 

While among the distances of the exterior planets from the 
Sun, that of Saturn (9 53) is nearly double as great as the 
distance of Jupiter (5-20), t^ distance of Uranus (19-18) is, 
however, tnore than double that of Saturn ; so the distance 
of Neptune (30-04) is less than that which would be re- 
quired for a repeated doubling of the distance by full ten 
times the distance of the Earth from the Sun, i. e., an entire 
third of Neptune's distance from the Sun. The ^^Za^ie^ary 
boundaries were at that time 2484 million of geographical 
miles from the central body. By the discovery of Neptune, 
the landmark of our planetary knowledge has been advanced 
more than 892 million miles further (more than 10-8 times 
the distance of the Sun from the Earth). According as the 
disturbances are recognized which each last planet expe- 
riences, so will other planets be gradually discovered which 
now remain invisible by means of our telescopes on account 
of their remoteness.! 

According to the most recent determinations, Neptune's 
period of revolution is 60126-7 days, or 164 years and 226 
days, and his half major axis 30-03628. The eccentricity 
of his orbit, next to that of Venus the smallest, is 0-00871946 ; 
his mass, 74 ^4 e \ his apparent diameter, according to Encke 
and Cxalle, 2"-70, according to Challis even 3"-07, which 
gives as his density, in comparison with the Earth, 0-230 ; 
greater, therefore, than that of Uranus 0-173.$ 

Soon after the first discovery of Neptune by Galle, a ring 
was ascribed to him by Lassell and Challis. The former em- 
ployed a magnifying power of 567, and endeavored to determ- 
ine the considerable inclination of the ring to the ecliptic ; but 
subsequent investigations have, as long before in the case of 
Uranus, contradicted the opinion of the existence of a ring 
round Neptune. 

I dare scarcely allude in this work to the certainly earlie' 
labors of the distinguished and acute English geometrician, 

* Astr. Nachr., No. 580. 

t Leverrier, Recherches sur les Movvemens de la Planete Herschel, 
1846, in the Connaissance dcs Temps pour Van 1849, p. 254. 

X The very important element of the mass of Neptune has been grad- 
nally increased from -^^^^y accordhig to Adams, y^|y^ according to 
Peirce, -^^^^ according to Bond, and ^itw according to Sir John 
Herschel, y^|^^ according to Lassell, to y^j^^ according to Otto and 
August Struve. The last result has been adopted in the text. 



NEPTUNE. 179 

Mr. Adams, of St. John's College, Cambridge. The historic- 
al facts which refer to these labors, and to Leverrier's and 
Galle's happy discovery of the new planet, have been circum- 
stantially and impartially developed from reliable sources in 
two works, by the astronomer royal, Airy, and by Bernhard 
von Lindenau.=^ Intellectual endeavors, almost' simultane- 



* Airy, in the Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, vol. 
vii.-, No. 9 (November, 1846), p. 121-1.52. Bernhard von Lindenau, 
Beitrag ziir Geschichte des Neptuns-Entdechmig, p. 1-32, and 235-238. 
At the instigation of Arago, Leverrier commenced, in the summer of 
1845, his investigations of the theory of Uranus. The results of this in- 
vestigation he laid before the Institute on the 10th of November, 1845, 
the 1st of June, 31st of August, and 5th of October, 1846, and published 
them at the same time ; but the most extensive and important of Lever- 
rier's labors which contained the solution of the whole problem appeared 
in the Connaissance des Temps four Van 1849. Adams laid the first 
results which he had obtained for the disturbing planet before Profes- 
sor Challis in September, 1845, without having them printed, and, to 
gether with some alterations in October of the same year, before the 
astronomer royal, still without making them public. The latter re- 
ceived the final results of Adams, with fresh corrections referring to a 
decrease of the distance, in the commencement of September, 1846. 
The young Cambridge geometrician expresses himself upon the chro- 
nological succession of the investigations which were directed to one 
and the same object with as much modesty as self-denial : " I mention 
these earlier dates merely to show that my results were arrived at in- 
dependently and previously to the publication of M. Leverrier, and not 
w^ith any intention of interfering with his just claims to the honor of 
the discovery ; for there is no doubt that his researches were first pub- 
lished to the world, and led to the actual discovery of the planet by Dr. 
Galle ; so that the facts stated above can not detract in the slightest 
degree from the credit due to M. Leverrier." Since, in the history of 
the discovery of Neptune, mention is frequently made of an early share 
which the great Konigsberg astronomer took in the hope already ex- 
pressed by Alexis Bouvard (the author of the tables of Uranus) in the 
year 1834, "of the disturbance of Uranus by a yet unknown planet," 
it will, perhaps, not be unacceptable to many readers of the Cosmos if 
I introduce here part of a letter which Bessel wrote to me on the 8th 
of May, 1840 (therefore two years before his conversation with Sir 
John Herschel, during his visit to CoUingwood) : " You request me to 
give you information as to the planet beyond Uranus. I could indeed 
refer you to friends in Konigsberg who, from misunderstanding, fancy 
that they know more about the matter than I do myself. I chose as 
the subject of a public lecture delivered upon the 28th of February, 
1840, the development of the connection hetween astronomical obsffnoa- 
tions and astronomy. The public know no diflerence between the two; 
consequently, their opinion was to be corrected. The indication of the 
development of astronomical knowledge from observations naturally 
led to the remark that we can by no means affirm that our theory ex- 
plains all the motions of the planets. Uranus afforded a proof of this, 
the old observations of which do not at all accord with elements which 
coincide with the later observations from 1783 to 1820. I believe that 



180 COSMOS. 

ously directeu to the same important end, present in their 
laudable competition so much the more interest, as they testi- 
fy, by the selection of means, to the present distinguished con' 
dition of higher mathematical knowledge. 

The Satellites of Neptune. 

While in exterior planets the existence of a ring presents 
itself only in one solitary instance, and its rarity permits of 
the conjecture that the organ and formation of an unconnect' 
ed girdle depends upon the conjunction of peculiar and diffi* 
cultly fulfilled conditions, so, on the contrary-, the existence of 
satellites accompanying the exterior planets (Jupiter, Saturn, 
Uranus) is a phenomenon as universal as the former is rare. 
Lassell discovered with certainty* the first satellite of Nep- 
tune so soon as the commencement of August, 1847, in his 
large twenty- feet refl.ector, with a 24-inch aperture. Las- 
sell's discovery was confirmed by Otto Struvef at Pulkowa 

I once told you that I have worked much upon this subject, but have 
come to no other result than the certainty that the present theory, or, 
much rather, its application to the solar system, as we are acquainted 
icith it, was insufficient to solve the mystery. Nevertheless, it must not, 
on that account, be considered upon my opinion to be unsolvable. We 
must first know accurately and completely what has been observed of 
Uranus. By the aid of one of my young hearers, Flemming, I have 
had all the observations reduced and compared, and thus the existing 
facts now lie before me complete. While the old observations do not 
agree with the theory, the more recent ones agree still less ; for now 
the error is a whole minute, and increases annually about 7" to 8", so 
that it will soon be much greater. I was therefore of opinion that the 
time might come when the solution of this mystery might perhaps be 
found in the discovery of a new planet whose elements might be ascer- 
tained by its influences upon Uranus, and confirmed by those exerted 
upon Saturn. That this time has already amved I am far from saying, 
but I shall examine now how far the existing facts can carry us. This 
is an investigation which I have pursued for so many years, and on ac- 
count of which I have followed so many views, that its results espe- 
cially interest me, and shall therefore be brought to an end as soon as 
possible. I have great confidence in Flemming, who will, in Dantzic 
to which place he has been called, continue the same reduction of ob- 
servations for Saturn and Jupiter which he has now made for Uranus. 
It is, in my opinion, fortunate that he has (for the present) no means 
of observation, and has no lectures to deliver. A time will indeed come 
when he must institute observations with a definite aim; then he should 
no longer want the means of carrying them out any more than he doea 
the ability to do so." 

* The first letter in which Lassell announced the discovery was on 
the 6th of August, 1847. (Schumacher, Astr. Nachr., No. 611, p. 165.) 

t Otto Struve, in the Astr. Nachr., No. 629. August Struve, in Doi&gt; 
pat, calculated the orbit of the first satellite of Neptune from the observ 
ations at Fulkowa. 



COMETS. 181 

(September 11th to December 20th, 1847), and Bond,* the 
director of the observatory at Cambridge (U. S.), (September 
16th, 1847). The Pulkowa observations gave : the period 
of rotation of Neptune's satellite, 5d. 21h. 7m. ; the inclina- 
tion of its orbit to the plane of the echptic, 34° 7' ; the dis- 
tance from the center of the primary, 216,000 geographic- 
al miles ; the 7naiS,-^-^\-^-^. Three years afterward (August 
14th, 1850), Lassell discovered a second satellite, for the ex- 
amination of which he employed a magnifying power of 628. t 
This last discovery has not, I beheve, been' confirmed by othel 
observers. 



III. 

THE COMETS. 

The comets, which Xenocrates and Theon of Alexandria 
call light-clouds, and which, according to an old Chaldean 
belief, Apollonius Myndius considered to " ascend periodically 
from great distances in long-regulated orbits," though subject 
to the attractive force of the central body, form a peculiar 
and separate group in the solar regions. They are distin- 
guished from the planets, properly so called, not merely by 
the eccentricity of their orbits, and, what is still more import- 
ant, their intersection of the planetary orbits ; they also pre- 
sent a variability of figure, a change of outline, which in some 
instances has been observable during the space of a few hours , 
as, for example, in the Comet of 1744, so accurately described 
by Hensius, and at the last appearance of Halley's Comet in 
1835. Before Encke had discovered the existence oi inte- 
rior comets of short periods of revolution, whose orbits were 
inclosed within those of the planets, dogmatic speculations, 
founded upon false analogies as to the increasing eccentricity, 
magnitude, and decreasing density in proportion to the dis- 
tance from the Sun, led to the opinion that planetary bodies 
of enormous volume would be discovered beyond Saturn, re- 
volving in eccentric orbits, and '' forming an intermediate 
group between planets and comets, and, indeed, th at the last 
exterior planet ought to be called a comet, since perhaps its 
orbit intersected that of Saturn, the planet next to it.":j: Such 

* W. C. Bond, in the Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and 
Sciences, vol. ii., p. 137 and 140. 

t Schum., Astr. Nachr., No. 729, p. 143. 

t " By means of a series of intermediate members," says Immanuet 



182 COSMOS. 

an opinion of the connection of forms in \ie universe, analo 
gous to ihd frequently misemployed doctrine of transition in 
organic nature, was shared by Immanuel Kant, one of the 
greatest minds of the eighteenth century. At two epochs, 
twenty-six and ninety-one years after the Naturgeschichtt 
des Himmels was dedicated to the great Frederick by the 
Konigsberg philosopher, Uranus and Neptune were discovered 
by William Herschel and G-alle ; but the orbits of both plan- 
ets have a less degree of eccentricity than that of Saturn ; 
if even the latter is 0*056, so, on the contrary, Neptune, the 
outermost of all known planets, moves in an orbit whose ec- 
centricity is 0-008, nearly the same as that of Venus (O.OOG). 
In addition to this, Uranus and Neptune present none of the 
predicted cometary characters. 

As, in more recent times (since 1819), the discovery of- 
Encke's Comet was gradually followed by those of five inte 
rior comets, forming, as it were, a peculiar group, the semi- 
major axis of whose orbits for the most part resembles those 
of the small planets, the question was raised as to whether 
the group of interior comets may not, as is conjectured by 
Olbers, in his hypothesis respecting the small planets, origin- 
ally have formed a single cosmical body ; whether the large 
comet may not have been separated into several by the influ- 
ence of Mars, in the same way that such a separation, as it 
were a bipartition, took place under the eye of the observer 
in the year 1846, on the occasion of the last return of the 
interior comet of Biela. Certain similarities in their elements 
have induced Professor Stephen Alexander, of the College of 
New Jersey, to institute investigations^ as to the possibility 

Kant, " the last planets beyond Saturn would gradually pass into com- 
ets, and so the last species would be connected with the first. The law 
according to which the eccentricity of the planetary orbits is propor- 
tionate to the distances of the plauets from the Sun, supports this con- 
jecture. The eccentricity increases with the distance, and, conseque^-jt- 
,y, the more distant planets approach nearer to the definition of com- 
ets. The last planet and the fTrst comet may be called that body which 
in its perihelion intersects the orbit of the adjoining planet, perhaps 
that of Saturn. Our theory of the mechanical formation of the cosmical 
bodies is also clearly proved by the magnitudes of the planetary masses 
which increase with the distance from the Sun." — Kant, Naturge- 
schichte des Himmels (1755), in his Sdmmtliche Werke, th. vi., p. 88 and 
195. At the commencement of the fifth section (p. 131), he speaks of 
the former cometary nature which Saturn was supposed to have pos« 
pessed. 

* Stephen Alexander, "On the Similarity of arrangement of the As« 
teroids and the Comets of short pei'iod, and the possibility of their 
common origin," in Gould's Astronom. Journal, No. 19, p. 147, and No 



COMETS, 183 

of a comi.ion oiigin of the asteroids between Mars and Ju- 
piter, with some or even all of the comets. The grounds of 
analogy which have been deduced from the nebulous envel- 
opes of the asteroids must, according to all more recent and 
accurate observations, be renounced. The orbits of the small 
planets are not parallel to each other ; that of Pallas certain- 
ly presents the phenomenon of an extreme inclination ; but, 
with all the want of parallehsan between their own orbits, 
still theij do not intersect in a cometary manner any one of 
the orbits of the large older, i. e., earlier discovered planets 
This circumstance, so extremely essential in every assumption 
of a primitive projectile direction and projectile velocity, ap- 
pears, besides the difference in the physical constitution of the 
interior comets, and the entirely vaporless small planets, to 
•render the similarity of origin of both kinds of cosmical bodies 
very improbable. Laplace, also, in his theory of planetary 
genesis from rings of vapor revolving round the Sun, in which 
matter aggregates into spheres aromid a nucleus, considered 
it necessary to separate the comets from the planets : " Dans 
Vhypothese des zones de vapeurs et d'un noyau s' accroissant 
far la condensation de V atmosphere qui V environne, les co- 
metes sont etrangeres au systeme planet aire T^ " According 
to the hypothesis of zones of vapor, and of a nucleus increas- 
ing by the condensation of the atmosphere which surrounds 
them, the comets are strangers to the planetary system. ' 

We have already directed attention, in the Delineations of 
Nature.^ to the fact that the comets at the same time pos- 
sess the smallest mass, and occupy the largest space, of any 
bodies in the solar regions ; in their number, also, they ex- 
ceed all other planetary bodies ; the theory of probabilities, 
applied to the data of the equable distribution of the orbits, 
the boundaries, the perihelions, and the possibility that some 

20, p. 181. The author distinguishes, with Hind (Schum., Astr. Nachr., 
No. 724), "the comets of short period, whose semi-axes are all nearly 
the same with those of the small planets between Mars and Jupiter; 
and the other class, including the comets whose mean distance or semi- 
axis is somewhat less than that of Uranus." He concludes the first es- 
say with this remark: ** Different facts and coincidences agree in indi- 
cating a near appulse, if not an actual collision, of Mars with a large 
comet in 1315 or 1316, that the comet was thereby broken into three 
parts, whose orbits (it may be presumed) received even then their pres- 
ent form, viz., that still presented by the Comets of 1812, 1815, and 
1846, which are fragments of the dissevered comet." 

* Laplace, Expos, du Syst. du Monde (ed. 1824), p. 414. 

t On Comets: in the Delineation of Nature, s^e Cosmog, vol. i , p 
lOO-UO. 



184 COSMOS. 

remain i?ivisible, indicates the existence of many tliousands. 
"VVe except the aerolites or meteoric asteroids, as their nature 
is still enveloped in great obscurity. Among the comets, 
those must be distinguished whose orbits have been calcula- 
ted by astronomers, and such of which there are only incom- 
plete observations, or mere indications recorded. As, accord- 
ing to Galle's last accurate enumeration, 178 had been cal- 
culated up to the year 1847, so it may be admissible to adopt 
as the total number, with those which have been merely in^ 
dicated, the assumption of six or seven hundred observed com- 
ets. When the Comet of 1682, predicted by Halley, appeared 
again in 1759, it was considered very remarkable that three 
comets should be visible in the same year. At the present 
time, the investigation of the heavens is carried on simultane- 
ously at several parts of the globe, and with such energy, 
that in each of the years 1819, 1825, and 1840, four were 
discovered and calculated; in 1826, five; and in 1846, even 
eight. » 

Of comets visible with t^ » naked eye, more have been ob- 
served recently than during the latter part of the previous 
century ; but among them, those which have a great brill- 
iancy in the head and tail still remain, on account of their 
unfrequency, remarkable phenomena. It will not be with- 
out interest to enumerate how many comets, visible in -Europe 
to the naked eye, have appeared during the last centuries.* 
The epoch in which they were most numerous was the six- 
teenth century, during which twenty-three such comets were 
&lt;5een. The seventeenth numbered twelve, and of these only 
two during its first half In the eighteenth century only eight 
appeared, but nine during the first fifty years of the nineteenth 
century. Among these, the most beautiful were those of 
1807, 1811, 1819, 1835, and 1843. In earlier ages, thirty 
or forty years have frequently passed without such a spec- 
tacle presenting itself in a single instance. In the years, 
however, during which comets seldom appear, there may be 
a number of large comets whose perihelia are situated be- 
yond the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn. Of the telescopic 
comets, there are at the present time, upon an average, at 
least two or three discovered annually. In three successive 
months (1840) Galle discovered three new comets ; from 1764 
to 1798, Messier discovered twelve ; from 1801 to 1827, Pons 
discovered twenty-seven. Thus Kepler's expression as to the 

* 111 the seven half centuries from 1500 to 1850, altogether 52 cometa 
have appeared which were visible to the naked eye; iu separate succea 

4. 



COMETS, 



185 



nui^ber of comets in the universe appears to hold good : ut 
jrisces in oceano. 

Of not less importance is the careful catalogue of comets 
which have appeared in China, and which Edward Biot has 
made known from the collection of Ma-tuan-lin. It reaches 
back beyond the foundation of the Ionic school of Thales and 
ths Lydian Alyattes, and comprises, in two sections, the place 
of the comets from 613 years before our own era until 1222 
years afterward, and then from 1222 to 1644, the period in 



seven equal periods, 13 


,10; 2, 10, 


4, 4, and 9. The follow 


individual years 






1500—1550 






1550—1600 


13 Com. 






10 Com. 


1600—1650 






1650—1700 


1607 






1652 


1618 






1664 


2 Com. 






1665 
1668 
1672 
1680 
1682 
1686 
1689 


• 


^• 




1696 
10 Cora. 


1700—1750 






1750—1800 


1702 






1759 


1744 






1766 


1784 (2) 






1769 


4 Com 






1781 
4 Com. 




1800—1850 






1807 


. 




1811 






1819 






1823 






1830 






1835 






1843 






1845 






18 


47 





9 Com. 



or the 28 Comets visible to tlje naked eye which are here enumerated 
In the sixteenth century (the epoch of Apianus, Girolamc Fracastoro, 
Landgravine William IV. of Hesse, Mastlin, and Tycho), 10 were de- 
scribed by Pingre, namely, those of 1500, 1505, 1506, 1512, 1514, 1516, 
1518, 1521, 1522, and 1530; further, the Comets of 1531, 1532, 1533 
1556, 1558, 1569, 1577, 1580, 1582. 1585, 1590, 1593, and 1596. 



186 COSMOS. 

which the dynasty of Ming ruled. I repeat here (see Cos- 
mos, vol. i., p. 99), that while from the middle of the third 
to the end of the fourteenth century it was necessary to cal 
culate comets exclusively from the Chinese observations, the 
calculation of Halley's Comet, on its appearance in the year 
1456, was the first calculation which was made from alto- 
gether European observations, those of Regiomontanus. These 
latter were again followed by the very accurate observations 
of Apianus at Ingoldstadt, upon the occasion of the reappear- 
ance of Halley's Comet in August of the year 1531. In the 
interval (May, 1500) appeared a magnificently brilliant com- 
et,* rendered famous by African and Brazilian travels of dis- 
covery, which was called in Italy Signor Asto7ie, the great 
Asta. Laugierf has detected, by similarity of the elements 
in the Chinese observations, a seventh appearance of Hal- 
ley's Comet (that of 1378) ; as well as that the third comet 
of 1840, discovered by Galle,^ on the 6th of March, appears 
to be identical with that of 1097. The Mexicans also con- 
nected events in their records with comets and other ob- 
servations of the heavens. The Comet of 1490, which I 
discovered in the Mexican manuscript of St. Tellier, and of 
which an engraving is inserted in my Monumens des Peuples 
indighies de V Amerique, I have found, singularly enough, 
to be mentioned as having been observed in December of 
that year only in the Chinese comet-register. § The Mexi- 
cans had inserted it in their register twenty-eight years be- 
fore the first appearance of Cortez upon the coasts of Vera 
Cruz (Chalchinhcuecan). 

I have, in the Delineations of Nature [Cosmos, vol. i., p. 
101), treated fully of the configuration, alterations of form, 

* This is the " evil-disposed" comet to which was ascribed the death 
of the celebrated Portuguese discoverer Bartholomsjeus Diaz, by ship- 
wreck, as he was saihng to the Cape of Good Hope; Humboldt, Ex 
amen Crit. de V Hist, de la G6ogr., tom. i., p. 296, aud torn, v., p. 80 
(Sousa, Asia Portug., tom. i., p. i., cap. v., p. 45.) 

t Laugier, in the Cojinaissance des Temps pour Van 1846, p. 99. 
Compare also Edward Biot, Recherches sur les Anciennes Apparitions 
Chinoises de la Comete de Halley ant&amp;rieures a Vann€e 1378, op. cit., p. 
70-84. 

X Upon the comet discovered by Galle in March, 1840, see Schu- 
macher, Astr. Nachr., bd. xviii., p. 188. 

$ See my Vues des Cordilleres (ed. in folio), pi. Iv., fig. 8, p. 281, 282 
The Mexicans had also a very correct view of the cause of a solar 
eclipse. The same Mexican manuscript, written at least a quarter of 
a century before the arrival of the Spaniards, represents the Sun as al 
most entirely covered by the Moon's disk, and with gtarrf visible at the 
same time. 



COMETS. 187 

light, ai^d color of comets, the emanations from their heads 
which, bent backward,^ form the tails, from the observations 
of Hensius (1744), Bessel, Struve, and Sir John Herschel. 
Besides the magnificent Gsmet of 1843,t which could be 
seen by Bowring, in Chihuahua (N."W. America), as a small 
white cloud from nine o'clock in the morning until sunset, 
and by Amici, in Parma, at full noon, 1° 23' eastward of 
ihe Sun,$ the first comet of the year 1847, discovered by 

* This iformation of ike tail at the anterior part of the comet's head, 
which has occupied Bessel's attention so much, was the opinion of New- 
ton and Winthrop (compare Newton's Principia, p. 511, and Philos. 
Transact., vol. Ivii., for the year 1767, p. 140, tig. 5). Newton consid- 
ei-ed that the tail was developed most considerably and longer near the 
Sun, because the cosmical ether (which we call, with Encke, the resist- 
ing medium) was the densest tliere, and the particulce caudce, strongly 
heated and supported by the ether, ascended more easily. Winthrop 
considered that the principal effect did not take place until some time 
after the perihelion passage, because, according to the law established 
by Newton (Principia, p. 424 and 466), the maxima are universally re- 
tarded (in periodical changes of heat as well as in ocean tides). 

t Arago, in the Annuaire for 1844, p. 395. The observation was made 
by the younger Amici. 

X With regard to the Comet of 1843, which appeared with unexam- 
pled splendor in Northern Europe during the month of March, near 
Orion, and approached nearer- to the Sun than any hitherto observed 
and calculated comet, all the details are collected in Sir John Herschel's 
Outlines of Astronomy, $ 589-597 ; and in Peirce, American Almanac 
for 1844, p. 42. On account of physiognomical resemblances whose 
uncertainty was already shown by Seneca {Nat. Quecst., lib. ii., caps, 
xi. andxvii.), it was at first considered to be identical with the comets 
of 1668 and 1689 {Cosmos, vol. i., p. 139, note; Galle, in Olbers's Come- 
tenbahnen, Nos. 42 and 50). Boguslawski (Schum., Astr. Nachr., No. 
545, p. 272) believes on tlie contrary, that its previous appearances were 
with a revolution of 147 years, those of 1695, 1548, and 1401 ; he even 
calls it the Comet of Aristotle, " because he traces it back to the year 
371 before our era, and, together with the talented Hellenist Thiersch, 
of Munich, considers it to be a comet which is mentioned in the Mete- 
orologicis of Aristotle, book i., cap. vi." But I'would call to mind that 
the name Comet of Aristotle is vague and indefinite. If that one is 
meant which Aristotle states to have disappeared in Orion, and which 
ne connects with the earthquake in Achaia, it must not be forgotten 
that this comet is stated by Callisthenes to have appeared before, by 
Diodorus after, and by Aristotle at the time of the earthquake. The 
«ixth and eighth chapters of the Meteorology treat of four comets whose 
epochs of appearance are characterized by the archons at Athens, and 
by unfortunate events. In this place those are mentioned in order: 
the western comet which appeared on the occasion of the great earth- 
quake at Achaia, accompanied with floods (cap. vii., 8) ; then the comet 
which appeared during the time of the Archon Eucles, the son of Mo- 
Ion ; afterward (cap. vi., 10) the Stagirite comes again to the western 
comet, that of the great earthquake, and at the same time calls the Ar 
chon Asteus — a name which incoiTect readings have changed into Aria 



188 COSMOS. 

Hind near Capella, has very recently been visible at London, 
near the Sun, on the day of its perihelion. 

taDus, and which was, on that account, erroneously considered by Pingr^, 
in his Comitographie, to signify one and the same person as Aristhcnes 
or Alcisthenes. The brilHancy of this comet of Asteus diffused itself 
over the third part of the sky ; the tail, which was called its way {odog), 
was also 60° in length. It extended nearly as far as Orion, where it 
gradually disappeared. In cap. vii., 9, the comet is mentioned which 
appeared simultaneously with the famous fall of aerolites near ^^gos 
Potamos {Cosmds, vol. i., p. 117), and which can scarcely be a confu- 
sion with the aerolite-cloud described by Damachos, which shone for 
70 days, and poured forth falling stars. Finally, Aristotle mentions 
(cap. vii., 10) a comet which appeared at the time of the Archon Ni- 
comachus, to which was ascribed a storm near Corinth. These four ap- 
pearances of comets occurred during the long period of 32 Olympiads : 
viz., the fall of aerolites, according to the Parian Chronicle, 01. 78, 1 
(468 B.C.), under the Archon Theagenides; the great comet of Asteus, 
which appeared at the time of the earthquake at Achaia, and disap- 
peared in the constellation of Orion, in Ol. 101, 4 (373 B.C.): Eucles, 
the son of Molon, erroneously called Euclides Diodorus (xii., 53), in 
Ol. 88, 2 (427 B.C.), as is also confirmed by the commentary of Jo- 
hannes Philoponus ; the comet of Nicomachus, in Ol. 109, 4 (341 B.C.). 
The date assigned by Pliny for the jubce effigies mutata in hastam, i* 
Ol. 108 {Plinius, ii., 2.5). Seneca also agrees in connecting the comet 
of A&amp;teus {Ol. 101, 4) immediately with the earthquake in Achaia, as 
he mentions the downfall of Bura and Helice, which towns Aristotle 
does no\ expressly mention, in the following manner: " Effigiem ignis 
longi fiiisse, Callisthenes tradit, antequam Burin et Helicen mare ab- 
sconderet. Aristoteles ait, non trabem illam, sed cometam fuisse." 
" Callisthenes affirms that the fiery shape appeared long before the sea 
overwhelmed Bui-is and Helice. Aristotle says that this was not a 
meteor, but a comet." (Seneca, Nai. Qucest., vii., 5.) Strabo (viii., 
p. 384, Cas.) places the downfall of these two frequently mentioned 
towns two years before the battle of Leuctra, whence again results the 
date, Ol. 101, 4. Finally, after Diodorus Siculus had more fully de- 
scribed this event as having occurred under the Archon Asteus (xv., 
48, 49), he places the brilliant comet which threw shadows (xv., 50) 
under the Archon Alcisthenes, a year later, Ol. 102, 1 (372 A.C.), and 
as a prediction of the decline of the Lacedaemonian rule; but the later 
Diodorus had the habit of transferring an event from one year to an- 
other; and the oldest and most reliable witnesses, Aristotle and the 
Parian Chronicle, speak in favor of the epoch of Asteus before that of 
Alcisthenes. Now since the assumption of a period of revolution for 
the beautiful Comet of 1843 of 147f years, leads Boguslawski to assign 
to its appearances the dates 1695, 1548, 1401, and 1106, up to the year 
371 before our era, the comet of the earthquake of Achaia corresponds 
with it, according to Aristotle, within two — according to Diodorus, to 
within one year ; which, if we could know any thing of the similarity 
of the orbit, is, when taking into consideration the probable disturban- 
ces during a period of 1214 years, certainly a very small error. When 
Pingr6, in the Com^tographie (1783, tom. i., p. 259-262), relying upon 
Diodorus and the Archon Alcisthenes instead of Asteus, places the 
comet in question in Orion, in Ol. 102, and still in the commencement 
of July, 371 before Christ, instead of 372, the reason perhaps lies in the 



COMETS. 189 

For the explanation of what has been said above of the re- 
mark of Chinese astronomers on the occasion of their observ- 
ation of the Comet of March, 837, in the dynasty of Thang, 
I insert here a translation from Ma-tuan-lin of the verbal 
statement of the law of direction of the tail. It is said there, 
*' In general, the tail of a comet which is situated eastward 
from the Sun is directed toward the east, calculating from 
the nucleus ; but if the comet appears to the west of the Sun, 
the tail turns toward the west."* Fracastoro and Appia- 
nus say, still more correctly, "that a line produced through 
the head of a comet in the direction of the axis of the tail 
meets the Sun." The words of Seneca are also characteristic : 
" The tails of comets fly from the Sun's rays." [Nat. Qucest., 
vii., 20.) While, among the yet known planets and comets, 
the periods of rotation dependent upon the half major axis, 
the shortest and the longest of the planetS) are in the propor- 
tion of 1 : 683, the proportion in the case of the comets is as 
1: 2670. Mercury (87d-97) is here compared with Neptune 

circumstance that, like some other astronomers, he characterizes the 
first year before the Christian era as anno 0. It is to be observed, in 
conclusion, that Sir John Herschel assumes for the Comet of 1843, seen 
in full daylight near the Sun, an entirely different period of revolution, 
one of 175 years, which leads to the years 1668, 1493, and 1318, as the 
dates of its previous appearances. (Compare Outlines, p. 208-372, with 
Galle, in Olbers's Cometenbahnen, p. 208; and Cosmos, vol. i., p. 137.) 
Other combinations by Peirce and Clausen lead to periods of revolution 
of even 21| or 7^ years: a sufficient proof how hazardous it is to trace 
back the Comet of 1843 to the archonship of Asteus. The mention of 
a comet under the archonship of Nicomachus, in the Meteorol., lib. i., 
cap. vii., 10, has at least the advantage of showing us that this work 
was written when Aristotle was at least 44 years of age. It has al- 
ways appeared to me remarkable that the great man, as he was already 
14 years old at the time of the earthquake at Achaia, and of the appear- 
ance in Orion of the great comet with a tail 60° in length, should speak 
with so little animation of so brilliant an object, and content himself 
with enumerating it among the other comets " whioh had appeared in 
his time." The astonishment increases when, in the same chapter, the 
statement is found that he had seen with his own eyes something misty, 
even a feeble haza {ko/xtj), round a fixed star in the hip-bone of the Dog 
(perhaps Trocyon in the small Dog), {Meteorol., i., 6, 9). Aristotle also 
speaks (i., 6,11) of his observation of the occultation of a star in Gemini 
by the disk of Jupiter. With regard to the vaporous or nebulous en- 
velope of Procyon (?), it recalls to my mind a phenomenon of which 
frequent mention is made in the old Mexican annals according to the 
Codex Tellerianns. " This year,' it is said there, " Citlalcholoa smoked 
again;" this is the name of the planet Venus, also called Tlazoteotl in 
the Aztec language (see my Vues des Cordilleret, tom. ii., p. 303) : this 
is probably, in the Grecian as well as the Mexican sky, a phenomenon 
of atmospheric refraction — the appearance of small halos. 

• Edward Biot, in the Comptes Rendus, tom. xvi., 1843. p. 751. 



190 ~ COSMOS. 

(60,126d-7), and the Comet of Encke (3-3 years) witli the 
Comet of 1680 (8814 years), observed by Gottfried Kirch at 
Coburg, Newton, and Halley. The distance of the fixed star 
nearest to our solar system (a Centauri) from the aphehon 
(point of greatest distance from the Sun) of the last-named 
comet is determined by Encke in an excellent treatise. The 
small velocity of its motion (ten feet in a second) in this out- 
ermost part of its orbit, the greatest proximity which the 
Comet of Lexell and Burckhardt (1770) has attained to the 
earth (six times the distance of the Moon), and the Comet 
of 1680 (and still more that of 1843) to the Sun, I have al- 
ready treated of in Cosmos, vol. i., p. 109, and vol. iv., p. 
53-55. The second comet of the year 1819, which ap- 
peared, in Europe, suddenly to break forth from out of the 
Sun's rays in considerable magnitude, passed, according to 
the calculation of its elements, across the Sun's disk on the 
26th of June ;=^ unfortunately, its passage was not observed. 
This must also have been the case with the Comet of 1823, 
which, besides the ordinary tail turned from the Sun, had 
also another turned directly toward it. If the tails of both 
comets had a considerable length, vaporous parts of them 
must have mixed with our atmosphere, as certainly often hap- 
pens. The question has been raised as to whether the won- 
derful mists of 1783 and 1831, which covered a great part of 
the Continent, were consequences of such an admixture J\ 

"While the quantity of radiant heat received by the Comets 
of 1680 and 1843 in such close proximity to the Sun has 
been compared to the focal temperature of a 32-inch burn- 
ing mirror,$ a highly-deserving§ astronomical friend of mine 

* Galle, ill the Supplement to Olbers's Cometenhahnen, p. 221, No. 
130. (With respect to the probable passage of the two-tailed comet of 
1823, see Edinb. Rev., 1848, No. 175, p. 193.) The treatise shortly be- 
fore quoted in the text, containing the true elements of the Comet of 
1680, contradicts Halley's fantastic idea, according to which, with a 
presumed period of 575 years, it had appeared at all the great epochs 
of the human race: at the time of the Deluge according to Hebrew tra- 
ditions, in the age of Ogyges according to Greek traditions, at the Tro- 
jan war, on the destruction of Nineveh, on the death of Julius Caesar, 
&amp;c. The period of revolution resulting from Encke's calculation is 
8814 years. The least distance from the surface of the Sun was, on the 
17th of December, 1680, only 128,000 geographical miles ; consequently, 
80,000 less than the distance of the Earth from the Moon. The aphe 
lion is 853-3 times the distance of the Earth from the Sun, and the 
proportion of the smallest to the greatest distance from the Sua is as 
1 : 140,000. t Arago, in the Annuaire for 1832, p. 236-255. 

X Sir John Herschel, Outlines, $ 592. 

^ Bernhard von Lindenau, in Schum., Astr. Nachr., No. 698, p. 25. 



COMETS. 191 

maintains that " all comets which are without a solid nu- 
cleus (on account of their extremely small density) have no 
solar heat, only the temperature of cosmical space. "^ If wo 
take into consideration the numerous and striking analogies 
of the phenomena which, according to Melloni and Forbes, 
luminous and non-luminous sources of heat present, it ap- 
pears difficult, in the present state of our physical reasoning, 
not to assume that processes go on in the Sun itself which si- 
multaneously produce radiant light and radiant heat by vi- 
brations of the ether (waves of different lengths). The dark- 
ening of the Moon by a comet, stated to have taken place in 
the year 1454, which the Jesuit Pontanus, the first trans- 
lator of the Byzantine author, George Phranza, beheved that 
he had discovered in a monkish manuscript, has long been 
mentioned in many astronomical works. This statement 
of the passage of a comet between the Earth and Moon in 
1454 is quite as erroneous as that asserted by Lichtenberg 
of the Comet of 1770. The Chronicon of Phranza first ap- 
peared complete at Vienna in 1796, and it is said there ex- 
pressly, that in the year of the world 6962, while an eclipse 
of the Moon took place, a comet like a Qiiist appeared and 
came near to the Moon quite in the ordinary manner, ac- 
cording to the order and circular orbits of the heavenly 
luminaries. The year of the world ( = 1450) is incorrect, 
as Phranza says distinctly the eclipse of the Moon and the 
appearance of the comet were seen after the taking of Con- 
stantinople (May the 19th, 1453), and an eclipse of the Moon 
actually happened upon the 12th of May, 1454. (See Jacobs, 
in Zach's Monatl. Corresp., bd. xxiii., 1811, p. 196-202.) 

The relation of Lexell's Comet to the satellites of Jupiter, 
and the perturbation which it suffers from them without in 
fluencing their periods of revolution [Cosmos, vol. i,, p. 110), 
have been more accurately investigated by Leverrier. Mes- 
sier discovered this remarkable comet as a feeble nebulous 
spot in Sagittarius upon the 14th of June, 1770 ; but eight 
days after, its nucleus shone as brightly as a star of the 2d 
magnitude. Before the perihelion passage, no tail Avas vis- 
ible ; afterward it developed itself by slight emanations 
scarcely one degree in length. Lexell found for his comet 
an elliptic orbit, and the period of rotation of 5* 585 years, 
which Burckhardt confirmed in his excellent prize essay 
According to Clausen, it had approached the Earth upon the 
Ifit of July, 1770, to a distance of 363 times the Earth's ra- 
* Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 36 and 37. 



.92 COSMOS. 

dius (1,244,000 geographical miles, or six times the Moon's 
distance). That the comet was not se^^n before March, 1776, 
and not later than October, 1781, according to Lexell's pre- 
vious conjecture, is analytically demonstrated by Laplace, in 
the fourth volume of the Mecanique Celeste, from the per- 
turbations occasioned by the Jovial system on the occasion 
of the approximations in the years 1767 and 1779. Lever- 
rier finds that, according to one hypothesis respecting the 
cometary orbits, this comet passed through orbits of the sat- 
ellites in 1779 ; according to another, that it remained at a 
considerable distance without the fourth satellite.^ 

The molecular conditions of the head or nucleus, so seldom 
possessing a definite outline, as well as the tail of the com- 
ets, is rendered so much the more mysterious from the fact 
that it causes no refraction, and, as was proved by Arago's 
important discovery {Cosmos, vol. i., p. 105, and note), that 
the cometary light contains a portion oi polarized light, and 
consequently reflected sun-light. Although the smallest stars 
are seen in undiminished brilliancy through the vaporous em- 
anations of the tail, and even through the center of the nu- 
cleus itself, or at least in very great proximity to the center, 
(per centrum non alitor quam per nubem ulteriora cernatur : 
Seneca, Nat. Qucest., vii., 18) ; so, on the contrary, the an- 
alysis of the cometary light in Arago's experiments, during 
which I was present, shows that the vaporous envelopes are 
capable! of reflecting light, notwithstanding their extremely 
slight density, and that these bodies have " an imperfect 
transparency, t since light does not pass through them unim- 
peded." In this group of vaporous bodies, the solitary in- 
stances of great luminous intensity, as in the Comet of 1843, 
or the star-like shining of a nucleus, excite so much the more 
astonishment when it is assumed that their light proceeds 
solely from a reflection of the solar rays. Is there not, how- 
ever, in addition to this, a peculiar light-producing process 
going on in the comets ? 

The brush-like membered tails emanating from the comets, 
and consisting of vapory matter of millions of miles in length, 
diffuse themselves in space, and form, perhaps, either the re- 
sisting mediums itself, which gradually contracts the orbit 

* Leverrier, in the Comptes Rendvs, torn, xix., 1844, p. 982-993. 

t Newton considered that the most brilliant comets shone only with 
reflected sun-light. " Splendent cometa;," says he, " luce Solis a se 
reflexa." (Princ. Mathem., ed. Le Seur et Jaquier, 1760, torn, iii,, 
p. 5r7.) X Bessel, in Schum. Jahrbuch for 1837, p. 169. 

$ Cosmos, vol. i., p. 106, and vol. iii., p. 39. 



COMETS 193 

of Encke's Comet, or they mix with the old cosmicai matter 
which has not aggregated into spheres, or condensed into the 
rings, and which appears to us as the zodiacal light. We 
see, as it were, before our eyes, material particles disappear, 
and can scarcely conjecture where they again collect. How- 
ever probable may be the condensation, in the neighborhood 
of the central body of our system, of a gaseous fluid filling 
space, still, in the case of the comets, whose nuclei, accord- 
ing to Val?., diminish in the perihelion, this fluid, condensed 
there, can scarcely be looked upon as pressing upon a vesicu- 
lar vapory envelope. =^ Although in the streamers of the 
comets the outlines of the reflecting portion of the vapory 
envelope is generally very indefinite, the circumstance that, 
in some individuals (for example, Halley's Comet at the 2d 
of January, 1836, at the Cape of Good Hope), a sharpness 
of outline has been observed on the anterior parabolic part 
of the body, such as our masses of clouds seldom present, is 
so much the more striking and instructive as to the molecular 
condition of these bodies. The celebrated observer at the 
Cape compared the unusual appearance, testifying to the in- 
tensity of the mutual attraction of the particles, with that of 
an alabaster vessel strongly illuminated in the interior.! 

Since the appearance of the astronomical part of my De- 
lineation of Nature, the cometary world has presented a 
phenomenon whose mere possibility could scarcely have been 
suspected beforehand. Biela's Comet, an interior one of 
short period, 6f years in its revolution, has separated into 
two comets of similar figure though unequal dimensions, both 
having a head and tail. So long as they could be observed, 
they did not unite again, and proceeded on their course sep- 
arately, almost parallel with each other. Hind had, on the 

* Valz, Essai sur la Determination de la Densiti de V Ether dans Vespace 
PlanHaire, 1830, p. 2; and Cosmos, vol. i., p. 106. The so-carefully 
observing and always unprejudiced Hevelius had also directed atten- 
tion to the increase in the size of the cometary nuclei, with increased 
distance from the Sun. (Pingre, Com^tographie, torn, ii., p. 193.) The 
determinations of the diameter of Encke's Comet in the perihelion is 
very difficult, if accuracy is desired. The comet is a nebulous mass, in 
which the center, or one point of it, is the brightest, even prominently 
bright. From this point, which, however, presents no appearance of a 
disk, and can not be called a comet-head, the light decreases very rapid- 
ly all around, and at the same time the vapor elongates toward one disk, 
so that this elongation appears as a tail. The measurements, therefore, 
refer to this mass of vapor, whose circumference, without having really 
dsfinite boundaries, decreases in perihelion. 

i Sir John Herschel, Results of Astronomical Observations at the Cap^ 
of Good Hope, 1847, $ 366, pi. xv. and xvi. 
Vol. IV.— I 



1 94 COSMOS. 

19th of DecemlDer, 1845, already remarked a kind of pro- 
tuberance toward the north ; but on the 21st there was, ac- 
cording to Encke's observation in Berlin, still no signs of a 
separation visible. The subsequent separation was first de- 
tected in North America on the 29th of December, 1845 ; 
in Europe, not until the middle and end of January, 1846. 
The new smaller comet proceeded toward the north. The 
distance of the two was at first 3', afterward (February 20th), 
according to Otto Struve's interesting drawing, 6'.* The 
luminous intensity varied in such a manner that the gradu- 
ally increasing secondary comet for some time exceeded the 
principal comet in brightness. The. nebulous envelopes which 
surrounded each of the nuclei had no definite outlines : that 
of the larger comet, indeed, showed a less luminous protuber- 
ance toward S.S.W. ; but the space between the two comets 
was seen at Pulkowa quite free from nebulous matter. f A 
few days later. Lieutenant Maury, in AYashington, remarked, 
with a nine-inch Munich refractor, rays which proceeded from 
the larger older comet to the smaller new one, so that a kind 
of bridge-like connection was produced for some time. On 
the 24th of March, the smaller comet was scarcely percepti- 
ble, on account of the decreasing luminous intensity. The 
larger one only was seen up to the 16th or 20th of April, 
when this also disappeared. I have described the wonderful 
phenomenon in detail,$ so far as it could be observed. Un- 
fortunately, the actual separation and the immediately previ- 
ous condition of the older comet escaped observation. Did 
the separated comet become invisible only on account of dis- 
tance and feeble luminosity, or did it resolve itself? Will it 
be again detected as an attendant, and will the Comet of 
Biela present similar anomalies at other reappearances ? 

The formation of a neiv planetary body by separatioji nat- 
urally excites the question whether, in the innumerable com- 
ets revolving round the Sun, several have not originated by 
a similar process, or do not daily originate so ? whether they 

* The subsequent (5th of March) mcrease of distance seen to the ex 
tent of 9° 19' was, as Plantaraour has shown, merely apparent, and do 
pendent upon the approximation to the Earth. Both parts of the douhU 
comet remained at the same distance from each other from February 
until the 10th of March. 

t " Le 19 Fevrier, 1846, on aper9oit le fond noir du ciel qui separe les 
deux cometes." — Otto Struve, in the Bulletin Physico-matMmatique de 
VAcad. des Sciences de St. Pitesbourg, tom. vi., No. 4. 

t Compare Outlines, $ 580-583 ; Galle, in Olbers's Comeienbahnenf 
V. 232. 



COMETS. VJb 

may not acquire different orbits by retardation, i. e., unequal 
velocity of revolution, and the unequal influence of perturba- 
tions ? In a treatise already alluded to, Stephen Alexander 
has attempted to explain the genesis of all the interior com- 
ets by the assumption of such an hypothesis, certainly but in- 
adequately founded. In antiquity, also, similar occurrences 
appear to have been observed, but not sufficiently described. 
Seneca states, upon the authority, as he himself says, of an 
unreliable witness, that the comet which was considered to 
have caused the destniction of the two towns of Helice and 
Bura separated into two parts. He adds ironically, why has 
no one seen two comets unite to form one ?^ The Chinest- 
astronomers speak of " three dome-formed comets," which ap- 
peared in the year 896, and pursued their course together.f 
Among the great number of calculated comets, there are, 
up to the present time, eight known, whose period of revolu- 
tion is shorter than that of Neptune. Of these eight, six are 
interior comets, i.e., such whose aplielia are within the orbit 
of Neptune, viz., the comets of Encke (aphelion, 4*09), of 
De Yico (502), Brorsen (5-64), Faye (5-93), Biela (6- 19), 
and D'Arrest (6-44). If the distance of the Earth from the 
Sun is taken as = 1 , the orbits of all these six interior com- 
ets have aphelia which are situated between Hygeia (3 "15), 
and a limit which is nearly \\ the Earth's distance from the 
Sun beyond Jupiter. The two other comets, likewise of a 
shorter period of revolution than Neptune, are the 74-year 
Comet of Olbers, and the 76-year Comet of Halley. Up to 
the year 1819, when Encke first discovered the existence of 
an interior comet, these two latter ones were those of the 
shortest period among the then calculated comets. Olbers's 
Comet of 1815, and Halley's Comet are, since the discovery 
of Neptune, situated in their aphelia only 4 and 5| times the 
Earth's distance from the San — beyond the limits which 
would allow of their being considered interior comets. Al- 
though the term interior comet may suffer alteration from the 

* " Bphorus non religiosissimae fidei, saepe decipitur, saepe decipit. Si- 
cut hie Cometem, qui omnium mortalium oculis custoditus est, quia in- 
gentis rei traxit eventus, cum Helicen et Burin ortu suo merserit, ait 
ilium discessisse in duas Stellas : quod prseter ilium nemo tradidit. Quis 
enim posset observare illud momentum, quo Cometes solutus et in duas 
partes redactus est ? Quomodem autem, si est qui viderit Cometem in 
duas dirimi, nemo vidit fieri ex duabus?" — Seneca, Nat. Qucest., lib. 
vii., cap. 16. 

t Edward Biot, Recherches sur les ComHes de la Collection de Ma- 
iuan-li.„, in the Comptes Rcndus, tom. xx., 1845, p. 334. 



196 COSMOS. 

discovery of Tra7is-neptitnian planets since the boundary 
which determines whether a comet is to be called an interior 
one is changeable, still this term is preferable to that of com 
ets of short period, from the fact that it is in each epoch of 
our knowledge dependent upon something definite. The six 
interior comets now accurately calculated certainly vary in 
their periods of revolution only from 3-3 to 7 4 years ; but if 
tlie return of the comet discovered by Peters at Naples, upon 
the 26th of June, 1846 (the 6th comet of the year 1846, with 
a half-major axis of 6*32), after a period of 16 years, should 
be confirmed, *" it may be foreseen that intermediate members, 
in reference to the duration of the period of revolution, will 
gradually be discovered between the Comets of Faye and 
Olbers. Then it would be difficult in future to fix a limit 
for the shortness of the period. Here follows the table in 
which Dr. Galle has arranged the elements of the six interior 
comets. 

* Galle, in Olbers's Methode der Cometenbahnen, p. 232, No. 174. The 
comets of Colla and Bremiker, of the years 1845 and 1840, present el- 
liptical orbits with proportionately not very short periods of revolution. 
(I allude to the 3065 and 8800 years of the Comets of 1811 and 1680.) 
They appear to have periods of revolution of only 249 and 344 yeare. 
(See Galle, op. cit., p. 229 and 231.) 



COMETS. 



197 







^ 


5 :; 5 


C5 — C&gt; 00 -^ 


• Is u 









05 '^ 


c: t^ CO -^ Ti&lt; 




. t^ 




1-H r-H CO 


i^ 10 c^ i^ ^ 
^ CJ ^ 10 c-i ^ 


1 




CJ 

rr 


CO C^J c^ 


— 1 Ci CO 10 
00 CO Ci 10 


gz'i 


P^ 






CO r^ lb 


&gt; . r 









00 C 




© s- :3 




CO 


c^ 05 1-1 

TJ&lt; I-H 




-la 






























CO 


05 CO 


CJ 00 CO CO t^ (M 


tT sJ ts. 




, 


CO 


CJCO &gt;o 


C^ -r}&lt; C5 i-H ;0 


£J 1— ( 




. 






10 -^ iTi -^ ,• 
■^ CO &lt;N r^ CM ^ 

CJ lO Oi 

op rH Iv. 


1 


00^ 




»0 CO 


«2 p. 


PQ 


"-• 


j3 


000 


CO 6 CO 


S in- K_^ 




(^ 


CO 


C^ 10 CN 




CO i3 &gt; 






c^ 


. "* &gt;-• 

--1 c^ 




K^S 






























CO 


CO (N 


CO CO t^ —1 CO "^ 






a 


"^ 01 &lt;-! 


■&lt;r t^ — 1 00 -^ 


4J 


• CO 

2-3 

*-5 






00 CI t&gt;. 00 CO ,• 
.-^ CO CJ5 (71 "** 

CO i^ -^ CO 

Tf r-l t-^ Cp 

CO 'H VO 


1 




C5^^ CO 
000 





CO 


C-J CO CO 

"^ I-( 












CO ^ 
































i-H 


10 00 CO 


"* CO ■* 00 05 00 


- ^: ^» 








1-1 10 lO 


c:^ 00 00 CO ip 


s-gft 




10 






CO cj c:) (M '^ 

■* lO ^ C5 
-^ CO CO I-- 


i 




00 


00 LO 


il- 


1 


--^ 


J 
OT 


000 

CO c-J 


CO 


ll-^ 








I-H CO 














^ &gt;^ 


















t^ 


lb ^^ 


1—1 00 CO r^ 


^ 5^0J 






in 


10 T-H XO 


05 CO C5 ^■ 


te ©-r 2; 


6 


00 CI, 






00 'J' r-H CO cri jV 
CJ CO CTi t^ r-l "^ 
00 —1 —1 

r-l ,-, CO 


&gt; 


?o 

CO 


C5 ^ 
CO Tt&lt; 10 


a -c ^ 

§••2 g - 






I-l 




CO Ai 10 


(m © © e 


















CO 


00 c&lt;i CO 


"* CJ 10 00 "* 


rco 






ITS 


T-l CO 


—1 CO 05 (7{ CO 


fc- I-H 

-,3 1-1 
© . 




CO 






I— t CO Oi "* 
C-l CO CO 


M 
g 


06 &lt;?* 


10 


l^ CJ 00 
^ CI 


H 


.-( 

2 


(?&lt; 


000 

t-» '^ CO 


CI 6-^ 


«l=^ 
-^d 








VO CO tH 
I-l CO 








r^^,^ ' ' ,■%./s^^ 








fl 


. 1« 


1 &gt; I 11 • 










.na 


■ ■III* 








© 

to 




• I • • CO ;h 
I I I I ^ © 








p. 




: : : :.2-S 








CJ 


OT "" 


Iff! 1 ' s 9 

« 1 i '• ^ -5 

S'©-^S'«'^ 








(U b^ 


© ca 

^^ 2 «- 

♦^•i: 


© 








'Eb'Sb.S ^ 


^ 






11 


cZ.5 J ©.2.2 






199 COSMOS. 

From the summary here given, it foUow^s that, since the 
discovery of Encke's Cornet^ as an interior one in the year 
1819, up to the discovery of the interior comet of D' Arrest, 
scarcely 32 years have elapsed. Yvon Yillarceau has also 
given elliptic elements for the last-named in Schumacher's 
Astron. Nachr., No. 773, and has, at the same time with 
Valz, put forward some conjectures as to its identity with 
the Comet of 1678, ohserved by La Hire, and calculated by 
Douwes. Two other comets, apparently of from 5 to 6 year 
'periods of revolution, are the 3d of 1819, discovered by Pons, 
and calculated by Encke ; and the 4th of 1819, discovered 
by Blanpain, and, according to Clausen, identical with the 1st 
of 1743. But neither of these can be classed with those 
which, from longer and more accurate observations, present 
a greater certainty and completeness of their elements. 

The inclination of the orbits of the interior comets to the 
plane of the ecliptic is, upon the whole, small, between 3° 
and 13°; that ofBrorsen's Comet alone is very considerable, 

* The short period of revolution of 1204 days was discovered by 
Encke on the reappearance of his comet in the year 1819. See the first 
calculated elliptical orbits in the Berliner Astron. Jahrbuch for 1822, 
p. 193, and for the constants of the resisting medium assumed to explain 
the accelerated revolution. Encke's Vierte Abhandlburg in the Schrif- 
ten der Berl. Akademie for the year 1844. (Compare Arago, in the^;i- 
nuaire for 1832, p. 181 ; in the Lettre a M. Alexandre de Humboldt, 1840, 
p. 12 ; and Galle, in Olbers's Cometenbahnen, p. 221.) As belonging to 
the history of Encke's Comet, it must here be' called to mind that, so far 
as our knowledge of the observations extends, it was first seen upon two 
days by Mechain on the 17th of January, 1786; then by Miss Carolina 
Herschel from the 7th to the 27th of November, 1795; afterward by 
Bouvard, Pons, and Huth, from the 20th of October to the 19th of No- 
vember, 1805; finally, as the tenth reappearance since Mechain's dis- 
covery in the year 1786, by Pons from the 25th of November, 1818, to 
the 12th of January, 1819. The first reappearance, calculated before- 
hand by Encke, was observed by RUmker at Paramatta. (Galle, op. 
cit., p. 215, 217, 221, and 222.) Biela's interior comet, or, as it is also 
called, Biela's and Gambart's, was first seen by Montaigne on the 8th 
of March, 1772 ; then by Pons on the 10th of November, 1805 ; after- 
ward on the 27th of February, 1826, at Josephstadt in Bohemia, by Von 
Biela ; and on the 9th of March by Gambart, at Marseilles. The ear- 
liest rediscoverer of the Comet of 1772 is undoubtedly Biela, and not 
Gambart; but, on the other hand, he calculated the elliptical elements 
of its orbit earlier than Biela, and nearly at the same time as Clausen. 
(AragO; in the Annuaire of 1832, p. 184; and in the Comptes Rendus, 
tom. iii., 1836, -p. 415.) The first reappearance of Biela's Comet, cal- 
culated beforehand, was observed by Henderson, at the Cape of Good 
Hope, in October and December, 1832. The already mentioned won- 
derful doubling of Biela's Comet by separation took place at its elev- 
enth reappearance since 1772, at the end of the year 1845. (See Gallo, 
by Gibers, p. 214, 218, 224, 227, and 232.) 



COMETS. 199 

and reaches 31*^ All the hitherto discovered interior com- 
ets have, jiko the principal and secondary planets of the en- 
tire solar system, a direct motion (from west to east, pro- 
ceeding in th«^ir orbits). Sir John Herschel has directed at- 
tei *;ion to the great rarity of retrograde motion of comets 
^lainng a slight inclination to the plane of the ecliiitic.^ 
Thii opposite direction of motion, which occurs only with a 
certam class of planetary bodies, is of great importance in 
reference to the very universally prevaihng opinion as to thf 
formation of the planetary bodies belonging to one system, 
and as to the primitive, impulsive, and projectile force. It 
shows us the cmnetary world, although subject even at the 
remotest distances to the attraction of the central body, in 
greater individuality and independence. Such a mode of 
viewing the subject has led to the idea of considering the 
comets as olderf than the planets — as it were primitive 
forms of the loosely aggregating matter in space. Under 
these presuppositions, it becomes a question whether, not- 
withstanding the enormous distance of the nearest fixed 
stars, whose parallax we know from the aphelion of the 
Comet of 1680, some of the comets which appear in the 
heavens may not be merely wanderers, through our solar 
system, moving from one Sun to another ? 

Next in order to the group of comets, I shall speak of the 
ring of the zodiacal light, as v/ith grea4; probability belong- 
ing to our solar region, and after that of the swarms 'tf inc- 
teoric asteroids which sometimes fall upon our eartfr, and 
with regard to whoso existence, as bodies in spaco, by no 
means unanimous opinions prevail. As, in acf;(3rd*anco with 
the course adopted by Chladni, Olbers, Laplace, Arago, Sir 
John Herschel, and Bessel, I consider the aerolites to bo of 
decidedly extra-terrestrial cosmical origin, I may venture, at 
the conclusion of the section upon the planets, confidently to 
express the expectation that, by continued accuracy in the 
observation of aerolites, fire-balls, and shooting- stars, the op- 
posite opinion will disappear in the same way that the opin- 

* Oxitlims, $ 601. 

t Laplace, Expos, du Systtme du Monde, p. 396 and 414. The special 
view of Laplace as to the comets being " wandeiniig nebulae" (petites 
nebnlouses errantes de systemes en systeraes solaires), " stands in op- 
position to the progress which has been made since the death ol iho 
great man, in the resolvability of so many nebulous spots into crow ded 
neaps of stars; the circumstance, also, that the comets have a portion 
o{ reflected polarized light, which the self-luminous bodies are destitute 
of. Compare Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 142 ; vol. iv., p. 22. 



200 COSMOS. 

ion, universally diffused up to the sixteenth century, as to the 
meteoric origin of the comets, has long done. While these 
bodies were considered by the astrological corporation ot 
"* Chaldeans in Babylon," by the greater part of the Pythago- 
rean school, and by Apollonius Myndius, as cosmical bodies 
reappearing at definite periods in long planetary orbits, the 
powerful anti-Pythagorean school of Aristotle and that of 
Epigenes, controverted by Seneca, declared the comets to be 
productions of meteorological processes in our atmosphere. ^'^^ 

* There were divisions of opinion at Babylon in the learned Chaldean 
school of astrologers, as well as among the Pythagoreans, and, properly 
speaking, among all ancient schools. Seneca {Nat. Qm«s&lt;., vii., 3) quotes 
the antagonistic evidence of Apollonius Myndius and Epigenes. The 
latter is seldom mentioned, yet Plinius (vii., 57) repi-esents him as 
" gravis auctor in primis," as does also, without praise, Censorius, De 
die Natali, cap. xvii., and Stob., Eel. Phys., i., 29, p. 586, ed. Heeren. 
(Compare Lobeck, Aglaoph., xi.) Diodorus (xv., 50) believes that the 
universal and prevailing opinion among the Babylonian astrologers 
(the Chaldeans) was, that the comets reappeared at definite times in 
their certain orbits. The division which prevailed between the Pytha- 
goreans as to the planetary nature of the comets, and which is mentioned 
by Aristotle (MeteoroL, lib. i., cap. vi., 1) and Pseudo-Plutarch (De Plac. 
Philos., lib. iii., cap. ii.), extended, according to the former {MeteoroL, 
i., 8, 2), also to the nature of the Milky, Way, the forsaken course of 
the Sun, or of the overthrown Pha6ton. (Compare also Letronne, in 
the M6m. de VAcad. des Inscriptions, 1839, tom. xii., p. 108.) By some 
of the Pythagoreans the opinion of Aristotle was advanced, " that the 
comets belonged to the number of those planets which, like Mercury, 
only became visible after a long time when rising in the course above 
the horizon." In the extremely fragmentary Pseudo-Plutarch it is said 
that they "ascend at definite times after a complete revolution." A 
great deal of matter, contained in separate works, referring to the na- 
ture of the comets, has been lost to us — that of Airian, which Stobaeus 
employed ; of Charimander, whose mere name has been retained only 
by Seneca and Pappus. Stobteus brings forward, as the opinion of the 
Chaldeans {Eclog., lib. i., cap. xxv., p. 61, Christ. Plantinus), that the 
reason the comets remain so seldom visible to us is because they hide 
themselves in the depths of the ether ("of space), like the fish in the 
depths of the ocean. The most graceful, and, in spite of its rhetorical 
coloring, the best founded opinion of antiquity, and the one correspond- 
ing most closely with pi'esent views, is that of Seneca. In the Nat. 
Qucest., lib. vii., cap. xxii., xxv., and xxxi., we read, " Non enim existi- 
mo cometem subitaneum ignem sed inter aetenia opera naturae. Quid 
enim miramur, cometas, tam rarum mundi spectaculum, nondum teneri 
legibus certis? nee initia illorum finesque patescere, quorum ex ingeu- 
tibus intervallis recursus est? Nondum sunt anni quirtgenti, ex quo 
Grascia .... stelhs numeros et nomina fecit. Multseque hodie sunt 
gentes, quae tantura facie noverit coelum ; quae nondurr sciant, cur Luna 
deficiat, quare obumbretur. Hoc apud nos quoque nuper ratio ad cer- 
ium perduxit. Veniet tempus, quo ista, quae nunc latent, in lucem dies 
extrahat et longioris aevi diligentia. Veniet tempus, quo posteri nostri 
lam aperta nos nescisse mirentur. Eleusis servat, quod ostendat revi 



ZODIACAL LIGHT. • 201 

Analogous fluctuations between cosmical and terrestrial hy- 
potheses, between universal space and the atmosphere, still 
lead, at last, to a more correct view of natural phenomena. 



IV. 

THE RING OP THE ZODIACAL LIGHT. 

In our solar system, so rich in varieties of form, the exist- 
ence, place, and configuration of many individual members 
have been discovered, since scarcely a century and a half, 
and at long intervals of time : first, the subordinate, or 'par- 
ticular systems., in which, analogous to the principal system 
of the Sun, smaller spherical cosmical bodies revolve round a 
larger ; then concentric rings round one, and that, indeed, 
one of the less dense and exterior planets which possesses 
the greatest number of satellites ; then the existence, and 
probably material cause, of the mild, pyramidal-formed, zo- 
diacal light, very visible to the naked eye ; then the mutu- 
ally intersecting orbits of the so-called small planets, ox as- 
teroids, inclosed between the regions of two principal planets, 
and situated beyond the zodiacal zone ; finally, the remarka- 
ble group of interior comets, whose aphelia are smaller than 
those of Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. In a cosmical repre- 

sentibus. Rerum natura sacra sua non simul tradit. Initiatos nos cre- 
diraus; in vestibulo ejus hyeremus. Ilia arcana non promiscue nee om- 
nibus patent, reducta et in interiore sacrario clausa sunt. Ex quibus 
aliud ha3C aetas, aliud quae post nos subibit, dispiciet. Tarde magna 
proveniunt." " For I do not think that comets are a casual outburst 
of fire, but belong to the eternal works of nature. For why should it 
surprise us that comets, so rare a phenomenon, should not yet be sub- 
ject to the regulation of any known laws ? and that their origin and 
ends should be hid from us, who see them only at immense intervals ? 
It is not yet five hundred years since Greece gave names and number 
to the stars. And to this day there are many nations who know nothing 
of the heavenly bodies but as they appear to the eye, who are still ig 
norant of the causes of the waves and eclipses of the moon ; even we 
ourselves have only lately attained an accurate knowledge of these phe- 
nomena. The time will arrive when the diligence of a remoter age 
shall throw light on subjects which are now involved in obscurity. 
The time will arrive when our posterity will wonder at our ignorance 
of things so plain to them. Eleusis reserves her favors for those who 
repeat their visits. Nature does not permit us to explore her sanctua- 
ry all at once. , We believe we are initiated, whereas we halt at the 
very threshold. Those mysteries are not revealed indiscriminately to 
all ; they are laid up and enshrined within the penetralia. Some are 
revealed to the men of our age, some to those who shall come after us 
Great results proceed slowly." 

I 2 



202 • COSMOS. 

sentdtioii of universal space, it is necessary to call to mind 
the difference of the members of the solar system, which by 
no means excludes similarity of origin and lasting depend- 
ence upon the moving forces. 

Great as is the obscurity which still envelops the material 
cause of the zodiacal light, still, however, with the mathe- 
matical certainty that the solar atmosphere can not reach 
beyond -^-^ of the distance of Mercury, the opinion supported 
by Laplace, Schubert, Arago, Poisson, and Biot, according to 
which the zodiacal light radiates from a vapory, flattened 
ring, freely revolving in space between the orbits of Venus 
and Mars, appears in the very deficient state of observation 
to be the most satisfactory. The outermost limits of the Sun's 
atmosphere, like that of Saturn (a subordinate system), could 
only extend to that point where the attraction of the uni- 
versal or partial central body exactly balanced the centrifu- 
gal force ; beyond this point the atmosphere must escape at 
a tangent, and continue its course either aggregated into 
spherical planets and satellites, or, when not aggregated into 
spheres, as solid and vaporous rings. From this point of 
view the ring of the zodiacal light comes within the cate- 
gory of planetary forms, which are subject to the universal 
laws of formation. 

From the small progress which this neglected part of our 
astronomical knowledge makes on the path of observation, I 
have little to add to that which I derived from the experience 
of others and myself, and have previously developed in the 
Delineation of Nature (vol. i., p. 127-134 ; vol. iv., p. 308). 
If, 22 years before Dominique Cassini, to whom the first de- 
tection of the zodiacal light is erroneously ascribed, Chil- 
drey, the chaplain of Lord Henry Somerset, had already re- 
commended this phenomenon to the attention of astronomers 
in his Britannica Baconica, published in 1661, as one which 
had previously been unnoticed and observed by him during 
several years, in February and the commencement of March, 
so must I also mention (according to a remark of Olbers) a 
letter which Rothmann wrote to Tycho, from whence it re- 
sults that Tycho saw the zodiacal light as early as the end 
of the sixteenth century, and considered it to be an abnormal 
spring-evening twihght. The strikingly greater luminous in- 
tensity of this phenomenon in Spain, upon the coasts of Va- 
lencia and the plains of New Castile, first incited me to con 
tinuous observation before I left Europe. The strength of 
the light— it might almost be called illumination — increased 



ZODIACAL LIGHT, 'iUb 

surprisingly the more I approached the equator in South 
America and the South Sea. In the continually dry, clear 
air of Cumana, in the grass-steppes [llanos) of Caraccas, upon 
the elevated plains of Q,uito and the Mexican seas, especial- 
ly at heights from eight to twelve thousand feet, where I 
could remain longer, the brightness sometimes exceeded that 
of the most beautiful sparks of the Milky Way, between the 
fore part of Argus and Sagittarius, or, to speak of our part of 
the hemisphere, between the Eagle and the Swan. 

Upon the whole, the brightness of the zodiacal light did 
not appear to me to increase at all perceptibly with the ele- 
vation of the point whence it was seen, but much rather to 
depend principally upon the interior variability of the phe- 
nomenon itself — upon the greater or less intensity of the 
light-giving process, as is shown by my 'observations in the 
South Sea, in which, indeed, a reflection was remarked like 
that seen on the going down of the Sun. I say principally, 
since I do not deny the possibility of a simultaneous influence 
of the condition of the air (greater or less diaphaneity) of the 
higher strata of the atmosphere, while my instruments indi- 
cated in the lower strata no hygrometric variations, or, much 
rather, favorable ones. Advances of our knowledge of the 
zodiacal light are to be expected especially from the tropics, 
where the meteorological processes attain the "highest degree 
of uniformity or regularity in the periodical recurrence of the 
changes. The phenomenon is there perpetual ; and a careful 
comparison of observations at points of diflerent elevation and 
under diflerent local conditions, would, with the application 
of the theory of probabilities, decide what should be ascribed 
to cosmical light-processes, what to merely meteorological in- 
fluences. 

It has been repeatedly aflirmed that in Europe scarcely 
any zodiacal light, or only a feeble trace of it, could be seen 
in several successive years. Has the light appeared propor- 
tionately weakened in such years in the equinoctial zone 
also ? The investigation must not, however, be restricted to 
the statement of the configuration according to the distance 
/rom known stars or direct measurements. The intensity of 
the light, its uniformity or probable intermittence (darting 
and flashing), its analysis by the polariscope, should be espe- 
cially investigated. Arago [Annuaire for 1836, p. 289) has 
•,lready pointed, out that the comparative observation of Dom- 
inique Cassini would perhaps clearly prove "que la supposi- 
tion des intermittences de la diaphanite atmospherique ne 



204 COSMOS. 

Baurait suffire a I'explication des variations signalees par cet 
astronome" — "that the supposition of intermittent variations 
in the diaphaneity of the atmosphere would not suffice for the 
explanation of the changes indicated by that astronomer. ' 

Immediately after the observations of this great astronomer 
at Paris, and of his friend Fatio de Duillier, an inclination to 
similar labors showed itself in Indian travelers (Father Noel, 
De Beze, and Duhalde) ; but isolated reports (for the greater 
part only describing the gratification experienced at the un- 
usual prospect) are not available for the sound discussion of 
the causes of the variabihty. It is not by rapid travels or so- 
called voyages round the world, as the labors of the active 
Horner have recently shown (Zach, Monatl. Coi'resp., bd. x., 
p. 337-340), that tlie deserved object is to be obtained. It 
is only by a permanent stay of several years in some tropical 
country that the problem of variable configuration and lu- 
minous intensity can be solved. Therefore, the most is to be 
expected for the subject which now occupies us, as well as for 
the entire science of meteorology, from the ultimate difilision 
of scientific culture throughout the equinoctial world — the for- 
mer Spanish America — where large populous towns, Cuzco, 
La Paz, Potosi, are situated between 10,700 and 12,500 feet 
above the level of the sea. The numerical results which 
Houzeau was able to obtain, though certainly based upon 
only a small number of observations, make it probable that 
the major axis of the zodiacal light no more coincides with 
the plane of the Sun's equator, than the vapory mass of the 
ring whose molecular condition is unknown to us extends be- 
yond the Earth's orbit. (Schum., Astr. Nachr., No. 492.) 



V. 

FALLING STARS, FIRE-BALLS, AND METEORIC STONES. 

Since the spring of 1845, when I published the Delinea- 
tions of Nature, or the general survey of cosmical phenomena, 
the pri3vious results of the observation of aerolites and periodic 
streams of falling stars have been abundantly extended and 
corrected. Much has been subjected to a stricter and more 
careful criticism, especially the discussion, so important for 
the whole of this mysterious phenomenon, of the divergence, 
i. €., the situation of the point of departure .in the recurring 
epochs of swarms of falling stars. The number of these 
epochs, also, of which, for a bng time, the August and No- 



SHOOTING STARS. 205 

veniber 'pp.riods alone attracted attention, has been increased 
by recent observations, whose results present a high degi'ce 
of probability. From the meritorious labors, first of Brandes, 
Benzenberg, Olbers, and Bessel, subsequently of Erman, Bo- 
guslawski, Gluetelet, Feldt, Saigey, Edward Heis, and Juhus 
Schmidt, corresponding measurements have been commenced, 
and a more generally diffused mathematical spirit has ren^ 
dered it more difficult, through self-deception, to make uncer- 
tain observations agree with a preconceived theory. 

The progress in the study of fire-meteors would be so much 
the quicker in proportion as facts are impartially separated 
from opinions, and details put to the test ; but not every thing 
discarded as being imperfectly observed which can not yet be 
explained. It appears to me most important to separate the 
'physical relations from the geometrical and numerical rela- 
tions, which latter are, upon the whole, capable of being es- 
tablished Avith greater certainty. To this class belong alti- 
tude, velocity, individuality, and multiplicity, of the points of 
departure when divergence is detected ; the mean number of 
fire-meteors in sporadic ox periodic appearances, reduced, ac- 
cording to their frequency, to the same measure of time ; the 
magnitude and configuration in connection with the time of 
year, or with the length of time from midnight. The inves- 
tigation of both kinds of relations, the physical and the geo- 
metrical, will gradually lead to one and the same end — to 
genetic considerations as to the intrinsic nature of the phe- 
nomenon. 

I have already pointed out the fact that, upon the ivhole, 
intercourse with universal space and its contents is restricted 
to that which we acquire through oscillations exciting light 
and heat, as well as by the mysterious attractive forces which 
remote masses (cosmical bodies) exercise upon our terrestrial 
globe, its oceans and atmospheric envelope, according to the 
quantity of their material particles. The luminous vibra- 
tions which proceed from the smallest telescopic stars of a 
resolvable nebula, and of which our eyes are sensible, brings 
us a testimony of the oldest existence of matter, in the same 
way that it mathematically demonstrates to us the certain 
knowledge of the velocity and aberration of light.=^ A sen- 

* The aspect of the starry heavens presents to us objects o{ unequal 
date. Much has long ceased to exist before the knowledge of its pres- 
ence reaches usi much has been otherwise arranged. Cosmos, vol. i., 
p. 154, and vol. iii., p. 89, and note. (Compare also Bacon, Nov. Organ.^ 
Lend., 1733, p. 371, andW. Herschel,in Ph%l. Trans, for 1802, p. 498.^ 



206 COSMOS. 

satifin of light from the depths of the star- filled space of 
heaven leads us back, by means of a chain of ideas, through 
myriads of centuries into the depths of antiquity. Although 
the impression of light which streams of falling stars, explod- 
ing aerolite fire-balls, or similar fire-meteors give, may be of 
an entirely different nature ; although they may not take fire 
until they enter the Earth's atmosphere, still the falling 
aerolites present the sohtary instance of a material connec- 
tion with something which is foreign to our planet. We 
are astonished " at being able to touch, weigh, and chem- 
ically decompose metallic and earthy masses which belong 
to the outer world, to celestial space," to find in them the 
minerals of our native earth, making it probable, as the 
great Newton conjectured, that the materials which be- 
longed to one group of cosmical bodies are for the most part 
the same.*" 

For the knowledge of the most ancient falls of aerolites 
which are determined with chronological accuracy, we are 
indebted to the industry of the all-registering Chinese. Such 
reports reach back to the year 644 before our era ; therefore 
to the time of Tyrtseus and the second Messenian war of the 
Spartans, 179 years before the fall of the enormous meteoric 
mass near ^Egos Potamos. Edward Biot has found in Ma- 
tuan-lin, which contains extracts from the astronomical sec- 
tion of the most ancient annals of the empire, sixteen falls of 
aerolites for the epoch from, the middle of the seventh cen- 
tury before Christ up to 333 years after Christ, while the 
Greek and Roman authors mention only four such phenom- 
ena during the same space of time. 

It is remarkable that the Ionian school, in accordance with 
our present opinions, early assumed the cosmical origin of 
meteoric stones. The impression which such a magnificent 
phenomenon as that of JEgos Potamos (at a point which be- 
came still more celebrated sixty-two years afterward by the 
conclusion of the Peloponnesian war by the victory of Lysan- 
der over the Athenians), made upon all the Hellenic races, 
must have exerted a decisive and not sufficiently regarded 
influence upon the direction and development of the Ionian 
physiology.] Anaxagoras of Clazomena was at the mature 
age of thirty two years when that event of nature took place 
According to him, the stars are masses torn away from the 

* Cosmos, vol. i., p. 132. 

t See the opinions of the Greeks as to the falls of meteoric stones, in 
Cosmos, vol. i., p. 133 ; vol. ii., p. 309, note *. 



SHOOTING STARS. 207 

earth by the violence of the rotation (Plut., De Plac. Philos.f 
iii., 13). He considers that the whole heavens may be com- 
posed of stones (Plato, De Legib., xii., p. 967). The stony 
solid bodies are made to glow by the fiery ether, so that they 
reflect the light communicated to them by the ether. Lower 
than the Moon, and still between her and the Earth, there 
move, says Anaxagoras, according to Theophrastus (Stobseus, 
Eclog. Phijs., lib. i., p. 560), yet other dark bodies, which 
can also produce eclipses of the Moon (Diog. Laert., ii., 12 ; 
Origenes, JPhilosophum, cap. viii.). Diogenes of Apollonia, 
who, if he is not a disciple of Anaximenes,=* still probably 
belongs to an epoch between Anaxagoras and Democritus, 
expresses himself still more distinctly as to the structure of 
the world, and, as it were, more moved by the impression of 
the great fall of aerolites. According to him, as I have al- 
ready mentioned, " invisible (dark) masses of stone move with 
the visible stars, and remain, on that account, unknown. The 
former sometimes fall upon the earth, and are extinguished, 
as happened with the stony star which fell near Mgos Po- 
tamos." (Stob., Eclog., p 508. )t 

The " opinion of some physicists" as to fiery meteors (fall- 
ing stars and aerolites), which Plutarch develops in detail in 
the life of Lysander (cap. xii.), is precisely that of the Cre- 
tan Diogenes. " FaUing stars," it is said there, " are not 
ejections and waste of the ethereal fire, which, when they 
enter our atmosphere, are extinguished after their ignition ; 
they are much rather the off-shoots of celestial bodies, of such 
a nature that, by a slackening of the revolution, they are shot 

* Brandis, Gesch. der Grieckisch-Rom. Pkilosophie, torn, i., p. 272- 
277, against Schleiermacher, in the Abhandl. der Berl. Akad. from the 
year 1804-1811 (Berl., 1815), p. 79-124. 

t When Stobseus, in the same passage {Eclog. Phys., p. 508), ascribes 
to the Apollonian that he had called the stars pumice-sione-like bodies 
(therefore porous stones), the occasion for this term might have been 
the idea so generally dimised in antiquity, that all celestial bodies were 
nourished by moist exhalations. The Sun gives back again what is 
absorbed. (Aristot., Meteorol., ed. Ideler, tom. i., p. 509 ; Seneca, Nat. 
Q,u(Est., lib. iv., 2.) The pumice-stone-like cosmical bodies have their 
peculiar exhalations. " These, which can not be seen so long as they 
wander round in the celestial space, are stones; they ignite and art 
extinguished again when they fall to the earth." (Plut., De Plac 
Philos., ii., 13.) Pliny considers the fall of meteoric stones as frequent 
(Plinius, i., 59) : " Decidere tamen crebro, non erit du.bium." He also 
knew that the fall in clear air produced aloud noise (ii., 43). The ap- 
parently analogous passage in Seneca, in which he mentions Anaxime- 
nes {Nat. Qucest., lib. ii., 17), refers probably to the thunder in a 
9torm-cloud 



208 COSMOS. 

down."* We find nothing of this view of the structure of 
the universe, this assumption of dark cosmical bodies whicli 
fall upon our earth, in the doctrines of the old Ionic schools, 
from Thales and Hippocrates to Empedocles.f The impres- 
sion made by the occurrence of nature in the 78th Olympiad 
appears to have powerfully called forth the idea of the fall 
of dark masses. In the more recent Pseudo-Plutarch (Plac, 
ii., 13), we read merely that the Milesian Thales considered 
*' all stars to. be earthy Midi fiery bodies (yecjdr) Kal tfiTTvpa)." 
The endeavors of the earlier Ionic physiology were directed 
to the discovery of the primitive cause of all things, forma- 
tion by mixture, gradational change and transition of one 
kind of matter into another : to the processes of genetic de- 
velo'pnient by solidification or dilution. The revolution of 
the sphere of the heavens, " which holds the Earth firmly in 
the center," was already conceived by Empedocles as an act- 
ively moving cosmical force. Since, in these first attempts 
at physical theories, the ether, X\iQ fire-air (and, indeed, fire 
itself), represents the expansive force of heat, so the idea of 
the propelling revolution rending fragments from the Earth 
became connected with the \ohy region of the ether . There- 
fore Aristotle calls (MeteoroL, i., 339, Bekker) the ether "the 
eternally moving body,"$ as it were the immediate substra- 
tum of motion, and seeks for etymological reasons for this as- 
sertion. On this account, we find in the biography of Ly- 
sander " that the relaxation of the centrifugal force causes 
the fall of celestial bodies ;" as also in another place, where 
Plutarch, evidently alluding again to opinions of Anaxago- 
ras, or Diogenes of Apollonia {De Facie in Orbe Lu7ice, p. 
9-23), puts forward the assertion "that the Moon would fall 
to the Earth like a stone in a sling if its centrifugal force 

* This remarkable passage (Plut, Lys., cap. xii.), literally translated 
runs thus : " But there is another and more probable opinion, which 
holds that falling stars are not emanations or detached parts ot" the el- 
ementary fire, that go out the moment they are kindled, nor yet a quan- 
tity of air bursting out from some compression, and taking fire in the 
upper regions ; but that they are really heavenly bodies, which, from 
some relaxation of the rapidity of their motion, or by some irregular 
concussion, are loosened and fall, not so much upon the habitable part 
of the globe as into the ocean, which is the reason that their substance 
is seldom seen." 

t With regard to absolutely dark cosmical bodies, or such in which 
the light-procens ceases {periodically?); as to the opinions of moderns 
(Laplace and Bessel) ; and Bessel's observation, confirmed by Peters in 
K6nigsberg, of a variability of the proper rrotion of Procyon, see Cotmos, 
vol- iii., p. 164-166. t Compare Cosmos, vol. iii., p. 31-33. 



SHOOTING STARS. 209 

ceased."* Thus we see in this simile, after the assumption 
of a centrifugal revolution which Empedocles perceived in 
the apparent rotation of the celestia.. sphere, a centripetal 
force gradually arise as an ideal antithesis. This force was 
specially and most distinctly described by the acute inter- 
preter of Aristotle, Simplicius (p. 491, Bekker). He explains 
the non falling of the celestial bodies thus : " that the cen- 
trifugal force predominates over the proper fallforce, the 
draiviiig downward T These are the first conjectures re- 
specting active central forces ; and the Alexandrian, JohaU' 
ues Philoponus, a disciple of Ammonius Hermea, probably 
of the sixth century, as it were, recognizing also the inertia 
of matter, first ascribes " the motion of the revolutionary 
planets to a primitive impulse,'' which he ingeniously (De 
Creatione Mundi, lih. i., cap. xii.) imites with the idea of 
the " fall, a tendency of all heavy and light bodies toward 
the Earth." We have thus endeavored to show how a great 
phenomenon of nature and the earliest purely cosmical ex- 
planation of a fall of aerolites essentially contributed in 
Grecian antiquity, step by step, but certainly not by math- 
ematical reasoning, to develop the germ which, fostered by 
the intellectual labors of the following centuries, led to Huy- 
gens's discovery of the laws of circular motion. 

Commencing from the geometrical relations of the periodic 
(not sporadic) falling stars, we direct our attention especially 
to what recent observations as to the divergence or point of 
departure of the meteors, and their entirely planetary ve^ 
locity, have made known. Both these circumstances, di- 
vergence and velocity, characterize them with a high degree 
of probability as luminous bodies which present themselves 
independently of the Earth's rotation, aud penetrate into our' 
atmosphere from ivitliout, from space. The North Amer- 
ican observations of the November period on the occasion of 
the falls of stars in 1833, 1834, and 1837, indicated as the 
point of departure the star y Leonis ; the observations of 
the August phenomenon, in the year 1839, Algol in Perseus, 
or a point between Perseus and Taurus. These centers of 
divergence were about the constellations toward which the 
Earth moved at the same epoch. t Saigey, who has submit- 

• The remarkable passage alluded to in the text in Plutarch, Be Facit 
in, Orbe Lutkb, p. 923, is literally translated, " However, the motion of 
the Moon and the violence of the revolution itself prevents it from fall- 
ing, just as things placed in a sling are prevented from falling by theif 
motion in a cii'cle " t Cosmos, vol. i., p. 118, 119 



210 COSMOS. 

ted the Auierican observations of 1833 to a very accurate in- 
vestigation, remarks that the fixed radiation from the con- 
stellation Leo is only observed properly after midnight, in the 
last three or four hours before daybreak ; that of eighteen ob- 
servers between the town of Mexico and Lake Huron, only 
ten perceived the same general point of departure of the me- 
teors,=^ which Denison Olmsted, Professor of Mathematics in 
New Haven (Connecticut), indicated. 

The excellent work of Edward Heis, of Aix-la-Chapelle, 
which presents in a condensed form the very accurate ob- 
servations of falling stars made by himself during ten years, 
contains results as to the phenomena of divergence, which 
are so much the more important as the observer has dis- 
cussed them with mathematical strictness. According to 
him,t " the falling stars of the November period present the 
peculiarity that their paths are more dispersed than those of 
the August period. In each of the two periods there were 
simultaneously several points of departure by no means al- 
ways proceeding from the same constellation, as there was 
too great a tendency to assume since the year 1833," Be- 
sides the principal point of departure of Algol in Perseus, 
Heis finds in the August periods of the years 1839, 1841, 
1842, 1843, 1844, 1847, and 1848, two others in Draco and 
the North Pole.X " In order to deduce accurate results as 
to the points of departure of the paths of the falling stars in 
the November periods for the years 1839, 1841, 1846, and 
1847, for the four points (Perseus, Leo, Cassiopeia, and the 
Dragon's Head), the mean path belonging to each was drawn 
upon a thirty-inch celestial globe, and in every case the po- 
sition of the point ascertained from which the greatest num- 
ber of paths proceeded. The investigation showed that of 
407 of the falling stars indicated according to their paths, 
171 came from Perseus, near the star 7/ in Medusa's Head, 
63 from Leo, 35 from Cassiopeia, near the changeable star o, 

* Coulvier-Gravier and Saigey, Rccherches sur les Etoiles Filantes, 
1847, p. 69-86. 

t " The periodical falling stars, and the results of the phenomena de- 
duced from the observations carried on during the last ten years at Aix- 
la-Chapelle, by Edward Heis," 1849, p. 7 and 26-30. 

X The statement of the North Pole being a center of radiation in the 
August period is founded only upon the observations of the one year 
1839 (10th of August), A traveler in the East, Dr. Asahel Grant, re- 
ports from Mardin, in Mesopotamia, "that about midnight the sky was, 
as it were, furrowed with falling stars, all of which proceeded from tha 
region of the polar star^ (Heis, p. 28, from a letter of Herrick's to 
^uetelet's and Grant's Diary,) 



SHOOTING STARS. 211 

-to from the Dragon's Head, but full 78 from undetermined 
points. The number of falling stars issuing from Perseus 
consequently amounted to nearly double those from Leo."=^ 

The divergence from Perseus has consequently shown it 
self in both periods as a very remarkable result. An acute 
observer, Julius Schmidt, attached to the Observatory at 
Bonn, w^ho has been occupied w^ith meteoric phenomena for 
eight or ten years, expresses himself upon this subject with 
great decision in a letter to me (July, 1851) : " If I deduct 
from the abundant falls of shooting stars in November, 1833, 
and 1834, as well as from subsequent ones, that kind in which 
the point in Leo sent out whole swarms of meteors, I am at 
present inclined to consider the Perseus point as that point 
of divergence which presents not only in August, but through 
out the ivhole year, the most meteors. This point is situated, 
according to the result deduced from 478 observations by 
Heis, in Rt. Asc. 503° and Decl. 51-5o (holding good for 
1844-6). In November, 1849 (from the 7th to the 14th), 
I saw some hundreds more shooting stars than I have ever 
remarked since 1841. Of these only a few, upon the whole, 
came from Leo ; by far the greater number belonged to the 
constellation of Perseus. It follows from this, as it appears 
to me, that the great November phenomenon of 1799 and 
1833 did not appear at that time (1841). Olbers also be- 
lieves that the maximum November appearance has a pe- 
riod of thirty-four years {Cosmos, vol. i., p. 127). If the di- 
rections of the meteor-paths are considered in their full com- 
plication and periodical recurrence, it is found that there are 
certain points of divergence which are always represented^ 
others which appear only sporadically and changeably." 

Whether, moreover, the different points of divergence alter 
with the years — which, if closed rings are assumed, would 
indicate an alteration in the situation of the ring in which 

* This preponderance of Perseus over Leo, as a point of departure, 
did not by any means obtain in the observations at Bremen on the night 
of the i|th November, 1838. A very experienced observer, Roswinkel, 
saviT, on the occasion of a very abundant fall of shooting stars, almost all 
the paths proceed from Leo and the southern part of Ursa Major; while 
in the night of the ||th of November, on the occasion of a fall but little 
less abundant, only four paths proceeded from Leo. Olbers (Schum., 
Attr. Nachr., No. 372) adds very significantly. On this night paths did 
not appear at all parallel to each other, and showed no relation to Leo: 
they appear, on account of the want of parallelism, to belong to the 
sporadic and the periodic class of falling stars. The proper November 
period was, however, certainly not to be compared in brilliancv with 
those of the years 1799, 1832, and 1833." 



212 COSMOS. 

the meteors move — can not at present be determined wrtn 
certainty from the observations. A beautiful series of such 
observations by Houzeau (during the years 1839 to 1842) 
appears to offer evidence against a progressive alteration.* 
Edward Heisf has very correctly remarked that, in Grecian 
and Roman antiquity, attention had already been directed to 
a certain temporary uniformity in the direction of shooting 
stars darting across the sky. That direction was then con- 
sidered as the result of a wind already blowing in the higher 
regions of the atmosphere, and predicted to the sailors an ap- 
proaching current of air descending thence into the lower re- 
gions. 

If the periodic streams of shooting stars are distinguished 
from the sporadic by the frequent parallelism of their paths, 
proceeding from one or more points of divergence, a second 
criterion of them is the numerical — the number of individua. 
meteors referred to a definite measure of time. We come 
here to the much-disputed question of the distinction of an 
extraordinary from an ordinary fall of shooting stars. Two 
excellent observers, Olbers and duetelet, have given as the 
mean number of meteors which can be reckoned hourly in 
the range of vision of one person upon not extraordinary 
days, the former five to six, the latter eight meteors4 For 
the discussion of this question, which is as important as the 
determination of the laws of motion of shooting stars, in ref- 
erence to their direction, a great number of observations are 
required. I have therefore referred with confidence to the 
already-mentioned observer, Herrn Julius Schmidt at Bonn, 
who, long accustomed to astronomical accuracy, takes up 
with his peculiar energy the whole phenomena of meteors — 
of which the formation of aerolites and their fall to the Earth 
appear to him merely a special phase, the rarest, and there- 
fore not the most important. The following are the principal 
results of the communications which I requested from him.§ 

* Saigey, p. 151 ; and upon Erman's determination of the points of con- 
vergence diametrically opposed to the points of divergence, p. 125-129. 

t Heis, Period. Sternschn., p. 6. (Compare also Anstot., Problem., 
xxvi., 23; Seneca, Nat. Qucest., lib. i., 14: " Ventum significat stella- 
rum discurrentium lapsus, et quidem ab ea parte qua erumpit.") I 
have myself long believed in the influence of the wind upon the direc- 
tion of the shooting stars, especially during my stay at Marseilles at the 
time of the Egyptian expedition. J Cosmos, vol. i., p. 113. 

$ All that is marked in the text with inverted commas I am indebted 
for to the friendly communication of Herrn Julius Schmidt, attached to 
the observatory at Bonn. 
BPe Saigey, p. 159. 



SHOOTING STARS. 213 

'* The mean number of sporadic shooting stars appearing 
there has been found, from many years of observation (be- 
tween 3 and 8 years), a fall of from four to five in the hour 
This is the ordinary condition when nothing periodic occurs 
The mean numbers of sporadic meteors in the individual 

months give for the hour, January, 3*4 ; February, 

March, 4-9 ; April, 2-4 ; May, 39 ; June, 53 ; July, 4-5 
August, 53 ; September, 4*7 ; October, 4*5 ; November, 5-3 ; 
December, 4'0. 

" Of the periodic meteors there may be expected, on the 
average, in each hour, above 13 or 15. For a single period, 
that of August, the stream of Laurentius presented the follow- 
ing gradual increases from sporadic to periodic, upon an av- 
ei J2^e of from three to eight years of observation. 



Time. 

6th of August 

7th 
8th 
9th 
10th " 


Number of 
meteors in 
one hour. 

.... 6 ... 

11 . .. 

. ... 15 . .. 

. . . . 29 . . . 

... 31 . .. 


stand 

. 3 ] 

. 8 
. 16 
. 18 
. 3 
. 1 


Number 
of years. 

.. 1 

.. 3 
.. 4 

.. 8 
. . 6 


nth 

12th " 


.... 19 ... 

7 . . 


.. 5 
. . 3 


The last year g'ave for the hour, notwith 
moonlight : 

On the 7th of August 

8th " 


mg the clear 
Meteors. 


9th 
10th 

nth '* 







12th 




Meteoi, 



(According to Heis, there were observed on the 10th of Au- 
gust : 

1839, in one hour, 160 Meteors. 

1841 '' 43 

1841 " 50 

In the August meteor-stream in 1842, there fell at the time 
of the maximum, in ten minutes, 34 shooting stars.) All 
these numbers refer to the circle of vision of one observer. 
Since the year 1838, the November falls have been less brill- 
iant. (On the 12th of November, 1839, Heis still counted 
hourly 22 to 35 meteors ; likewise, on the 13th of Novem- 



J214 C0 3MOS. 

ber, 1846, upon the average, 27 to 33.) So variable ia tlie 
abundance of the periodic streams in individual years ; but 
the number of the falling meteors always remains consider- 
ably greater than in ordinary nights, which show in one hour 
only four or five sporadic falls. The m'^teors appear to be 
the most seldom in Jaauaiy (calculating from the 4th), Feb- 
ruary, and March. ^ 

"Although the August and November periods are justly 
the most celebrated, still, since the shooting stars have been 
observed with greater accuracy, as to their number and par- 
allel direction, yet five others have been discovered. 

January : during the first days between the 1st and 3d ; 
probably somcA^hat doubtful. 

Apiil : 18th or 20th? already conjectured by Arago. 
(Great streams: 25th of April, 1095, 22d of April 1800, 
20th of April, 1803 ; Cosmos, vol. i., p. 125-126. An 
nuaire for 1836, p. 297.) 
May: 26th? 

July: 26th to the 30th; Gluetelet. Maximum prop- 
erly between the 27th and 29th of July. The most an- 
cient Chinese observations gave Edward Biot (unfortunate- 
ly too soon taken away) a general maximum between the 
18th and 27th of July. 

August, but before the Laurentius stream, especially be- 
tween the 2d and 5th of the month. For the most part, 
no regular increase is remarked from the 20th of July t4 
the 10 th of August. 

The Laurentius stream itself, M usschenbrock 

and Brandes {Cosmos, vol. i., p. 124, and note &gt;). Decided 
maximum on the 10th of August ; observed for many years. 
(According to an old tradition, which is diffused among 
the mountain regions about Pelion in Thessaly, on the feast 
of the Transfiguration, the 6th of March, the heavens open 
during the night, and the lights (Kav5r]Xia) appear in the 
midst of the opening ; Herrick, in Silliman's Amer. Jour- 
nal, vol. xxxvii., 1839, p. 337 ; and duetelet, in the Nouv. 
Mem. de V Acad, de Bruxelles, tom. xv., p. 9.) 

October : the 19th and the days about the 26th ; due- 
telet ; Boguslawski, in the ^' Arbeiteiuder schles. GeselU 
scliaftfur vaterl. Culture 1843, p. 178 ; and Heis, p. 83. 

* 1 have, however, myself observed a considerable fall of shooting 
stars on the T6th of March, 1803, iu the South Sea (Lat. IS^o N.). 
Also, 687 years oefore our era. tvf c weteor-strearas were seen in China, 
in the month of ivlareii {^Cosmos, vol. i., p. 128). 



SHOOTING STARS. 215 

The latter instituted observations on the 21st of October, 
1766, 18th October, 1838, 17th October, 1841, 24th of 
October, 1845, |ith October, 1847, and ||th October, 1848. 
(See remarks upon three October phenomena, in the years 
902, 1202, and 1366, Cosmos, vol. i., p. 128, and note f.) 
The conjecture of Boguslawski, that the Chinese swarm;:; 
of meteors, of the 18th and 27th of July, and the fall of 
shooting stars of the 21st of October (O.S.), 1366, may be 
the now advanced August and November periods, loses 
much of its weight after the recent experience of 1838- 
1848.=^ 

November: yfth, very seldom the 8th or 10th. The 
great fall of meteors of 1799, in Cumana, on the j^th of 
November, which Bonpland and I have described, so far 
gave occasion to believe in periodic appearances upon 
certain days, that on the occasion of the great fall of me- 

* An entirely similar fall of shooting stars as that which the younger 
Boguslawski found for October 21st, 1366 (O. S.), in Benesse de Horo- 
vie, Chronicon EcclesifB Pragensis {Cosmos, vol. i., p. 128), is fully de- 
scribed in the famous historical work of Duarte Nunez do Liao {Chron- 
icas dos Reis de Portugal Reformados, pt. i., Lisb., 1600, f. 187), but 
placed in the right of the 22d to 23d of October (0. S.). Were there 
two streams seen in Bohemia, and on the Tagus, or has one of the 
chroniclers erred in a day ? The following are the words of the Portu- 
guese historian : " Vindo o anno de 1366, seudo andados xxii. dias do 
mes de Octubro, tres meses antes do fallecimento del Rei D. Pedro (de 
Portugal), se fez no ceo hum movimento de estrellas, qual os homees 
nao virao nem ouvirao. E foi que desda mea noite por diante correrao 
todalas strellas do Levante para o Ponente, e acabado de serem juntas 
come^arao a correr humas para huraa parte e outras para ontra. 1 
despois descerao do ceo tantes e tam spessas, que tanto que forao baxas 
no ar, pareciao grandes fogueiras, e que o ceo e o ar ardiao, e que a 
mesma terra queria arder. O ceo parecia partido em muitas partes, 
aUi onde strellas nao stavao. E isto durou per muito spa^o. Os que 
isto viaOjhouverao tam grande medo e pavor, que stavao como attoni- 
tos e cuidavao todos de ser mortos, e que era vinda a fim do mundo." 
" In the year 1366, and xxii. days of the month of October being past, 
three months before the death of the king, Dom Pedro (of Portugal), 
there was in the heavens a movement of stars, such as men never be- 
fore saw or heard of. At midnight, and for some time after, all the stars 
moved from the east to the west ; and after being collected together, 
they began to move, some in one direction, and others in another. And 
afterward they fell from the sky in such numbers, and so thickly to- 
gether, that as they descended low in the air, they seemed large and 
fiery, and the sky and the air seemed to be in flames, and even the 
earth appeared as if ready to take fire. That portion of the sky where 
there were no stars seemed to be divided into many parts, and this 
lasted for a long time. Those who saw it were filled with such great 
fear and dismay, that they were astounded, imaginiiig they were struck 
dead, and that the end of the world had come." 



216 COSMOS. 

teors in 1833 (November, jf^^h) the phenomenon of the 

year 1799 was called to mind.^ 

December: -^oth.; but in 1798, according to Brandes's 

observation, December the ^th ; Herrick, in New Haven, 

1838, Dec. |th ; Hiis, 1847, December 8th and 10th. 

" Eight or nine epochs of periodic meteoric streams, of 
which the last five are most certainly determined, are here 
recommended to the industry of observers. The streams of 
different months are not alone different from each other ; in 
different years, also, the abundance and brilHancy of the 
same stream varies strikingly. 

" The upper limits of the height of shooting stars can not 
be ascertained with accuracy, and Olbers considers all heights 
above 120 miles as being less certainly determined. The 
lower boundaries which were formerly {^Cosmos, vol. i., p 

* Nearer epochs of comparison might have been brought forward, if 
they had been known at that time ; for example, the streams of meteors 
observed by Kloden, 1823, Nov. i|th, in Potsdam; by Berard, 1831, Nov. 
|-|th, on the Spanish coast; and by GTraf Suchtelu, at Orenberg, 1832, 
Nov. ||th {Cosmos, \o\. i., p. 124; and Schum., Astr. Nackr., No. 303. 
p. 242). The great phenomenon of the 11th and 12th of November, 
which Bonpland and I have described {Voyage aux Regions Equi- 
noxiales, liv. iv., chap, x., tom. iv., p. 34, 53d ed., 8vo), lasted from 
two to four o'clock in the morning. Upon the whole journey which we 
made through the forest region of the Orinoco southward, as far as Rio 
Negro, we found that the enormous fall of meteors had been seen by 
the missionaries, and in some cases recorded in the church books. In 
Labrador and Greenland, it threw the Esquimaux into a state of utter 
amazement as far as Lichtenau and New Hernihut (lat. 64° 14'). At 
Itterstadt, near Weimar, the pastor Zeising saw the same phenomenon 
that was at the same time Visible under the equator, and near the north 
polar circle in America. Since the periodicity of the St. Laureiitius 
stream, August 10th, did not attract general attention until long after 
the November period had, I have carefully placed together all the con- 
siderable and accurately-observed falls of shooting stars on the i|th 
November known to me up to 1846. There are 15 : 1799, 1818, 1822, 
1823; 1831-1839, every year; 1841 and 1846. I exclude those falls 
of meteors which differ by one or two days, such as those of the 10th 
of November, 1787, 8th of November, 1813. Such a periodicity close- 
ly connected with individual days is so much the more wonderful, as 
bodies of such a small mass are easily exposed to disturbances, and the 
breadth of the ring in which the meteors are supposed to be contained 
may surround the Earth for some days. The most brilliant November 
streams took place in 1799, 1831, 1833, 1834. (In my description of 
the meteor of 1799, the largest fire-ball has ascribed to it a diameter 
of 1^ and li*^, when it should be 1 and li lunar diameter.) This is 
also the place to mention the fire-ball which attracted the special at- 
tention of the director of the observatory at Toulouse, M. Petit, and 
w hose revolution' round the Earth he has calculated. ( Compies Rendus 
9 Aoat, 1847; and Schum., Astr. Nachr.,lio. 701, p. 71.) 



SHOOTING STARS. 217 

120) generally estimated at 16 miles (over 97,388 feet), must 
be greatly contracted. Some, according to measurement, de- 
scend very nearly to the level of the summit of Chimborazo 
and Aconcagua, to the distance of four geographical miles 
above the level of the sea. Heis remarked, on the contrary, 
a falling star seen simultaneously at Berlin and Breslau on 
the 10th of July, 1837, had, according to accurate calcula- 
tion, a height of 248 miles when its light first became visi- 
ble, and a height of 168 on its disappearance; others disap- 
peared during the same night at a height of 56 miles. From 
the older labors of Brandos (1823), it follows that of 100 well- 
defined shooting stars seen from two points of observation, 4 
had an elevation of only 4 to 12 miles ; 15 between 12 and 
24 m. ; 22 from 24 to 40 m. ; 35 (nearly one third) from 40 
to 60 m. ; 13 from 40 to 80 m. ; and only 11 (scarcely one 
tenth) above 80 m., their heights being between 180 and 
240 miles. From 4000 observations collected during nine 
years, it has been inferred, with regard to the color of the 
shooting stars, that two thirds are white, one seventh yellow, 
one seventeenth yellowish red, and only one thirty-seventh 
green." 

Olbers reports, that during the fall of meteors in the night 
of the 12th and 13th of November, in the year 1838, a beau- 
tiful northern light was visible at Bremen, which colored 
large parts of the sky with an intense blood-red light. The 
shooting stars darting across this region maintained their 
white color unaltered, whence it may be inferred that the 
northern light was further removed from the surface of the 
Earth than the shooting stars were at that point where they 
became invisible. (Schum., Astr. Nadir., No. 372, p. 78.) 
The relative velocity of shooting stars has hitherto been es- . 
timated at from 18 to 36 geographical miles a second, while 
the Earth has only a translatory velocity of 16*4 miles. 
{Cosmos, vol. i., p. 120, note =^.) Corresponding observations 
of Julius Schmidt at Bonn, and Heis at Aix-la-Chapelle 
(1849), gave as the actual minimum for a shooting star, 
which stood 48 miles vertically above St. Goar, and shot over 
the Lake of Laach, only 14 miles. According to other com- 
parisons of the same observer, and of Houzeau in Mons, the 
velocity of four shooting stars was found to be between 46 
and 95 miles in the second, consequently two to five times 
as great as the planetary velocity of the Earth. The cos-' 
mical origin is indeed most strongly proved by this result,: 
together with the constancy of the simple or multiple points 

Vol. IV.— K 



218 COSMOS. 

of divergence, i. e., together with the circumstance that 
periodic shooting stars, independently of the rotation v{ the 
Earth, proceed during several hours from the same star, 
even when this star is not that toward which the Earth is 
moving at the same time. According to the existing meas- 
urements, fire-balls appear to move slower than shooting 
Btars ; but it nevertheless remains striking, that when the 
former meteors fall, they sink such a little way into the 
ground. The mass at Ensisheim, in Alsace, weighing 276 
pounds (November 7th, 1492), penetrated only 3 feet, and 
the aerolite of Braunau (July 14th, 1847) to the same depth. 
I know of only two meteoric stones which have plowed up 
the loose earth for 6 and 18 feet : these are the aerolites of 
astro villari, in the Abruzzi (Febnmry 9th, 1583), and that 
of Hradschina, in the Agram district (May 6th, 1751). 

Whether any thing has ever fallen from the shooting staris 
to the Earth, has been much discussed in opposite senses. 
The straw roofs of the parish Belmont (Departement de 1' Ain, 
Arondissement Belley), which were set on fire by a meteor 
in the night of November 13th, 1835, just at the epoch of 
the known November phenomenon, received the fire, as it ap- 
pears, not from a falling shooting star, but from a bursting 
fire-ball, which problematical aerolite is said to have fallen, 
according to the statements of Millet d' Aubenton. A similar 
conflagration, caused by a fire-ball, occurred on the 22d of 
March, 1846, about three o'clock in the afternoon, in the com- 
mune of St. Paul, near Bagnere de Luchon. Only the fall 
of stones in Angers (on the 9th of July, 1822) was ascribed 
to a beautiful falling star seen near Poitiers. This phenom- 
enon, not sufiiciently described, deserves great attention. The 
falling stars resembled entirely the so-called Roman candles 
used in fire-works. It left behind it a straight streak, very 
narrow above, and very broad below, which lasted for ten 
or twelve minutes with great brilliancy. Seventeen miles 
northward of Poitiers an aerohte fell with a great detona- 
tion. 

Does all that the shooting stars contain burn in the outer- 
most strata of the atmosphere, whose refracting power causes 
the phenomenon of twilight ? The above-mentioned various 
colors, during the process of combustion, admit of the infer- 
ence of a chemical difference in the substances. In addition 
to this, the forms of these fiery meteors are exceedingly vari- 
able ; some form merely phospJwrescent lines of such fine- 
n1^8S and number, that Forster, in the winter of 1832, sa&gt;* 



AEROLITES. 21^ 

the sky illuminated by them with a feeble glow.^ Many 
shooting stars move merely as luminous points, and leave no 
tail behind them. The combustion, attended with rapid or 
slow disappear anf30 of the tails, which are generally many 
miles in length, is so much the more remarkable, as the burn- 
ing tails sometimes bend and sometimes move onward. The 
shining for some hours of the tail of a fire-ball which had long 
disappeared, observed by Admiral Krusenstern and his com 
panions during their voyage round the world, vividly calls to 
mind the long shining of the cloud from which the great 
aerolite of JEgos Potamos is said to have fallen, according to 
the certainly not quite trustworthy relation of Damachos. 
{Cosmos, vol. i., p. 133, and note f.) 

There are shooting stars of very different magnitude, in- 
creasing to the apparent diameter of Jupiter or Venus ; on 
the occasion, also, of the fall of shooting stars seen at Tou- 
louse (April 10th, 1812), and the observation of a fire-ball at 
Utrecht, on the 23d of August of the same year, they were 
seen to form, as it were, from a luminous point, to shoot out 
in a star-like manner, and then to expand to a sphere of the 
size of the Moon. In very abundant falls of meteors, such 
as those of 1799 and 1833, there have been undoubtedly 
many fire-balls, mixed with thousands of shooting stars ; but 
the identity of both kinds of fiery meteors has not been by 
any means proved hitherto. Relation is not identity. There 
still remains much to be investigated as to the physical rela- 
tions of both — as to the influence pointed out by Admiral 
Wrangel,! of the shooting stars upon the development of the 
polar light on the shores of the Frozen Sea, and as to the 
number of luminous processes indistinctly described, but not, 
on that account, to be hastily denied, which have preceded 
the formation of fire-balls. The greater number of fire-balls 
appear unaccompanied by shooting stars, and show no pe- 
riodicity in their appearance. What we know of shooting 
stars, with regard to their divergence from definite points, is 
at present only to be applied to fire-balls with caution. 

Meteoric stones fall the most rarely in a quite clear sky, 
without the previous formation of a black meteor-cloud, with- 
out any visible phenomenon of light, but with a terrible crack 
ling, as upon the 6th of September, 1843, near Klein-Wenden, 
not far from Miihlhausen ; or they fall, and this more fre- 
quently, shot out of a suddenly-formed dark cloud, accompa- 

* Forster's M^moire sur les Etoiles F'dantes, p. 31. 
t Cotmos, vol. i., p, 126, and note *. 



220 COSMOS. 

nied by phenomena of sound, though without light ; finally, 
and, indeed, the most frequently, the falls of meteoric stones 
present themselves in close connection with brilliant fire 
balls. Of this connection, the falls of stones at Barbotan 
(Dep. des Landes) on the 24th of July, 1790, with a simul- 
taneous appearance of a red fire-ball and a ichite meteoric 
cloud,* from which the aerolites fell ; the fall of stones at 
Benares, in Hindostan, 13th December^ 1798, and that of 
Aigle (Dep. de L'Orne) on the 26th of April, 1803, aflbrd 
v/ell-described and indubitable examples. The last of the 
phenomena here mentioned — that which among all has been 
investigated and described with the greatest care by Biot — 
has finally, 23 centuries after the great Thracian fall of stones, 
and 300 years since a Frate was killed by an aerolite at C re- 
ma,! put an end to the skepticism of the academists. A 

* Kanitz, Lehrhnch der Meteorologie, vol. iii., p. 277. 

t The great fall of aerolites at Creraa and on the shores of Adda is 
described with especial vivacity, but unfortunately in a rhetorical and 
vague manner, by the celebrated Petrus Martyr, of Anghiera {^Opus 
Episiolarum, Amst., 1670, No. cccclxv., p. 245-246). What preceded 
the fall itself was an almost total dai-kening on the 4th of September, 
1511, at the noon hour. " Fama est, pavonem immensum in aCrea Cre- 
mensi plaga fuisse visum. Tavo visus in pyramidem converti, adeoquo 
celei-i ab occidente in orientera raptari cursu, ut in hora) momento 
magnam hemisphserii partem, doctorum inspectantium sententia, per- 
volagse credatur. Ex nubium illico densitate tenebras ferunt surrex- 
'sse, quales viventium nulhis unquam se cognovisse fateatur. Per earn 
aoctis faciem, cum formidolosis fulguribus, inaudita tonitrua regionem 
--ircumsepserunt." " The report is, that an enormous peacock was seen 
flying in the sky above the town of Crema. The peacock appeared to 
change into a pyramid, and was carried from west to east with such 
rapidity, that in a moment it seemed to ti*averse the whole hemisphere, 
as some learned men imagined who saw it. Immediately afterward 
such darkness arose from the denseness of the clouds as was never 
known by mortal before. During this midnight gloom, unheard-of 
thunders, mingled with awful lightnings, resounded through that quar- 
ter of the heavens." . The illuminations were so intense, that the in- 
habitants round Bergamo could see the whole plain of Crema during 
the darkness. " Ex hori'endo illo fragore quid irata natura in eam re- 
gionem pepererit, percunctaberis. Saxa demisit in Cremensi planitie 
(ubi nullus unquam a^quans ovum lapis visus fuit) immensa; magnitu 
dini, pendens egregii. Decem fuisse reperta centilibralia sexa ferunt." 
•'You will perhaps inquire what accompanied that terrific commotion 
of nature. On the plain of Crema, where never before was seen a stone 
the size of an e^^, there fell pieces of rock of enormous dimensions and 
of immense weight. It is said that ten of these were found weighing 
a hundred pounds each. Birds, sheep, and even fish were killed." 
Under all these exaggerations, it may still bo seen that the meteoru. 
el&amp;ud out of which the stones fell must have been of uncommon black 
ue8s and thickues.=; Tlie " pavo" was undoubtedly a long and broad 



AEROLITES. 



221 



large fire-ball, which moved from S.E. to N.W., was seen at 
one o'clock in the afternoon at Alen9on, Falaise, and Caen, 
while the sky was quite clear. Some moments afterward 
there was heard near Aigle (Dep. de L'Orne) an explosion in 
a small, dark, almost motionless cloud, lasting for five or six 
minutes, which was followed three or four times by a noise 
like a cannon and a rattle of muskets, mixed with a number 
of drums. At each explosion, parts of the vapor, of which 
the cloud consisted, were removed. No appearance of light 
was visible in this instance. There fell at the same time 
upon an elliptical surface, whose major axis, from S.E. to 
N.W., had a length of six miles, a great number of meteoric 
stones, the largest of which weighed only 17^ pounds. They 
were hot but not red,=^ smoked visibly, and, what is very strik- 

tailed fire-ball. The terrible noise in the meteoric cloud is here repre- 
sented as the thunder accompanying the lightning (?). Anghiera him- 
self received in Spain a fragment, the size of a fist {ex fiiustris disrup- 
torum saxorum), and showed it to King Ferdinand the Catholic, in the 
presence of the famous warrior Gonzalo de Cordova. His letter ends 
with the words, " Mira super hisce prodigiis conscripta fanatice, physice, 
theologice ad nos missa sunt ex Italia. Quid portendant, quomodoque 
gignantur, tibi utraque servo, si aliquando ad nos veneris." " From 
these prodigies Italy has furnished us with many a marvel of supersti- 
tion, physic, and theology ; what they portend, and how they are to 
come to pass, you will learn whenever you come to us." (Written 
from Burgos to Fagiardus.) Cardanus {Opera, ed. Lugd., 1663, torn, 
iii., lib. XV., cap. Ixxii., p. 279) aftirms, still more accurately, that 1200 
aerolites fell among them, one of 120 pounds* weight, iron gray, of 
great density. The noise is said to have lasted two hours : " ut mi- 
rum sit, tamtam molera in acre sustineri potuisse ;" " it is marvelous 
that such a mass could be supported in the air," He considered the 
tailed fire-ball to be a comet, and errs in the date of the phenomenon 
by a year : " Vidimus anno 1510." Cardanus was at that time nine or 
ten years old. 

* Recently, on the occasion of the fall of aerolites at Braunau (July 
14th, 1847), the fallen masses of stone were so hot, that after six hours 
they could not be touched without causing a burn. I have already 
treated {Asic Centrale, tom. i., p. 408) of the analogy which the Scyth- 
ian myth of sacred gold presents with a fall of meteors. *'5.*As the 
Scythians say, theirs is the most recent of all nations; and it arose in 
the following manner. The first man that appeared in this country, 
which was a wilderness, was named Targitaus : they say that the par- 
ents of this Targitaus, in my opinion relating what is incredible — they 
Bay, however, that they were Jupiter and a daughter of the River Bo- 
rysthenes; that such was the origin of Targitaus; and that he had three 
sons, who went by the names ot Lipoxais, Apoxais, and the youngest, 
Colaxais; that during their reign a plow, a yoke, an ax, and a bowl of 
golden workmanship dropping down from heaven, fell on the Scythian 
territoiy; that the eldest, seeing them first, approached, intending to 
take them up, but as he came near, the gold began to burn; when he 
had retired the second went up, and it did the same again ; according 



222 COSMOS. 

ing, they were more easily broken during the first day afto» 
the fall than subsequently. I have intentionally given more 
time to this phenomenon, in order to be able to compare it 
with another of the 13th of September, 1768. About half 
past four o'clock in the afternoon of the above-mentioned day, 
a dark cloud was seen near the village of Luce (Dep. d'Eure 
et Loire), four miles westward of Chartres, in which a noise 
was heard Uke a cannon shot, and at the same time a hissing 
was perceived in the air, caused by the fall of a black stone 
moving in a curve. The stone, which had penetrated into 
the Earth, weighed 7^1bs., and was so hot that it could not 
be touched. It was very imperfectly analyzed by Lavoisier, 
Fougeroux, and Cadet. No phenomena of light were per- 
ceived throughout the whole occurrence. 

As soon as the observation of periodic falls of shooting stars 
was commenced, and their appearance on certain nights ex- 
pected, it wias remarked that the frequency of the meteors in- 
creased with the length of time from midnight, and that the 
greatest number fell between two and five in the morning. 
Already, on the occasion of the great fall of meteors at Cu 
mana in the night of the 11th and 12th of November, 1799, 

ly, the burning gold repulsed these ; but when the youngest went up 
the third, it became extinguished, and he carried the things home with 
him; and that the elder brothers, in consequence of this giving way, 
surrendered the whole authority to the youngest. 6. From Lipoxais, 
they say, are descended those Scythians who are called Auchatae ; from 
the second, Apoxais, those who are called Catiari and Traspies; and 
from the youngest of them, the royal race, who are called Paralatae 
But all have the name of Scoloti, from the surname of their king; but 
the Grecians call them Scythians. 7. The Scythians say that such was 
their origin ; and they reckon the whole number of years from their 
first beginning, from King Targitaus to the time that Darius crossed over 
against them, to be not more than a thousand years, but just that num 
ber. This sacred gold the kings watch with the greatest care, and an- 
nually approach it with magnificent sacrifices to render it propitious. 
If he who has the sacred gold happens to fall asleep in the open air on 
the festival, the Scythians say he can not survive the year, and on this 
account they give him as much land as he can ride round on horseback 
in one day. The country being very extensive, Colaxais established 
three of the kingdoms for his sons, and made that one the largest in 
which the gold is kept. The parts beyond the north of the inhabited 
districts the Scythians ^ay can neither be seen nor passed through, by 
reason of the feathers shed there ; for that the earth and air are full of 
feathers, and that it is these which intercept the view." — Herodotus, iv., 
5 and? (translation, Bohn's Classical Library, p. 238). But is the myth 
of sacred gold merely an ethnographical myth — an allusion to three 
kings' sons, the founders of three races of Scythians ? an allusion to the 
prominent position which the race of the youngest son, the Paralatae, 
attained? (Brandstatter, Scythica, de aurea Caterva, 1837, p. 69 and 81. • 



AEROLITES. 223 

my fellow- travelers saw the greatest swarm of sliociting stars 
between half past two and four o'clock- A very meritorious 
observer of the phenomena of meteors, Coulvier-Gravier, con- 
tributed an important essay to the Institute at Paris upon la 
variation horaire des etoiles jilantes. It is difficult to con- 
jecture the cause of such an hourly variation, an influence 
of the distance from the hour of midnight. If, under differ- 
ent meridians, the shooting stars do not become especially 
visible until a certain early hour, then, in the case of their 
dosmical origin, we must assume, what is still but little prob- 
able, viz., that these night, or, rather, early morning hours, 
fire especially adapted to the recognition of the shooting stars, 
while in other hours of the night more shooting stars pass 
by before midnight invisible. We must still long and pa- 
, tiently collect observations. BtUQCIoft LibxMrv 

The principal characters of the solid masses whicn lalf 
from the air I believe I have treated of with tolerable com- 
pleteness (^Cosmos, vol. i., p. 129), in reference to their chem- 
ical relations and the granular structure, especially investi- 
gated by Gustav Rose in accordance with the state of our 
knowledge in the year 1845. The successive labors of How- 
ard, Klaproth, Thenard, Vauquelin, Proust, Berzelius, Stro- 
meyer, Laugier, Dufresnoy, Gustav and Heinrich Rose, Bous- 
singault, Rammelsberg, and Shepard, have afforded a rich 
material,* and yet two thirds of the fallen meteoric stones, 
which lie at the bottom of the sea, escape our observation. 
Although it is striking that, under all zones, at points most 
distant from each other, the aerolites have a certain phys- 
iognomic resemblance — in Greenland, Mexico, and South 
America, in Europe, Siberia, and Hindostan — still, upon a 
closer investigation, they present very great differences 
Many contain yW of iron ; others (Siena) scarcely y|o '■&gt; 
nearly all have a thin black, brilliant, and, at the same time, 
veined coating : in one (Chantonnay) this crust was entire- 
ly wanting. The specific gravity of some meteoric stones 
amounts to as much as 4-28, while the carbonaceous stone 
of Alais, consisting of crumbling lamellae, showed a specific 
gravity of only 1*94. Some (Juvenas) have a doleritic struc- 
ture, in which crystallized olivin, augite, and anorthite are 
to be recognized separately ; others (the masses of Pallas) 
afford merely iron, containing nickel and olivin ; and others, 

* The metals discovered in meteoric stones are nickel, by Howard ; 
cobalt, by Stromeyer ; copper and chromium, by Laugier ; tin, byBcr 
ae'.ius. 



224 COSMOS. 

again (to judge from the proportions cf tlio ingredients), are 
aggregates of hornblende and albite (Chateau-Renard), or of 
hornblende and labrador (Blansko and Chantonnay). 

According to the general summary of results given by a 
sagacious chemist, Professor Rammelsberg, who has recently 
occupied himself uninterruptedly, and as actively as success- 
fully, with the analysis of aerolites and their composition from 
simple minerals, "the separation of the masses fallen from 
the air into meteoric iron and meteoric stones is not to be 
admitted in its strictest sense. Meteoric iron is sometimes 
found, though seldom, with silicates intermixed (the Siberian 
mass weighed again by Heis of 1 270 Russian pounds, with 
grains of olivin), and, on the other hand, many meteoric stones 
contoin metallic iron. 

"A. The tneteoric ^Vo?^, whose fall it has been possible to 
observe only a few times (Hradschrina, near Agram, on the 
26th of May, 1751, Braunau, 14th of July, 1847), while most 
analogous masses have already laid long upon the surface of 
the earth, possesses in general very similar physical and chem- 
ical properties. It almost always contains sulphuret of iron 
mixed with it in finer or coarser particles, which, however, 
do not appear to be either iron pyrites or magnetif; pyrites, 
but a sulphuret of iron. ^ The principal mass of such a me- 
teoric iron is also not pure metal, but consists of an alloy of 
iron and nickel, so that this constant presence of nickel (on 
the average 10 per cent., sometimes rather more, som.etimes 
rather less) serves justly as an especial criterion for the me- 
teoric nature of the whole mass. It is only an alloy of tico 
isomer 2'&gt;hous metals, not a combination in definite proportions. 
There are also present in minute quantity, cobalt, manganese, 
magnesium, copper, and carbon. The last-mentioned sub 
stance is partly mixed mechanically, as difficultly combusti- 
ble gi'aphite ; partly in chemical combination with iron, and 
therefore analogous to many kinds of bar-iron. The princi- 
pal mass of the meteoric iron contains also always a peculiar 
combination of 'pliosjihorus loith iron and nickel, which, on 
the solution of the iron in hydrochloric acid, remains in the 
form of silver-white, microscopic, crystalline needles and lam- 
ina?. 

"B. The meteoric stones, properly so called, it is customary 
to divide into tico classes, according to their external appear- 
ance. The stones of one class present, in an apparently ho 
mogeneous mass, grains and splinters o^meteoriciron, which 

* Raramelsberg, in Poggendoi-fi', Annalen, vol. Ixxiv., 1849, p. 142 



AEROLITES. 225 

are attracted b} the magnet, and possess entirely the nature 
of that found in larger masses. To this class belong, for ex- 
ample, the stones of Blansko, Lissa, Aigle, Ensisheim, Chan- 
tonnay, Klein- Wenden near Nordhausen, Erxleben, Chateau- 
Renard, and Utrecht. The stones of the other class are free 
from metallic admixtures,, and present rather a crystalline 
mixture of difierent mineral substances ; as, for example, the 
stones of Juvenas, Lontalax, and Stannern. 

" Since the time that Howard, Klaproth, and Vauquelin 
first instituted the chemical investigation of meteoric stones, 
for a long time no regard w'^as paid to the fact that they 
might be mixtures of separate combinations ; but they were 
examined only for their total constituents, and it was consid- 
ered sufficient to draw out the iron by the magnet. After 
Mohs had directed attention to the analogy between some 
aerolites and certain telluric rocks, Nordenskjold endeavored 
to prove that the aerolite of Lontalax, in Finland, consisted 
of olivin, leucite, and magnetic iron ore ; but the beautiful 
observations of Gustav Rose first placed it beyond doubt that 
the stone of Juvenas consists of magnetic pyrites, augite, and 
a feldspar very much resembling labrador. Guided by this, 
Berzelius endeavored, in a more extended essay {Kongl. Veten- 
skaps-Academiens Handlingar fur 1834), to eliminate, also 
by chemical methods, the mineralogical nature of the sepa- 
rate combinations in the aerolites of Blansko, Chantonnay, and 
Alais. The road happily pointed out by him beforehand has 
subsequently been abundantly followed. 

" a. The first and more numerous class oi meteoric stones, 
those with metallic iron, contain this disseminated through 
them, sometimes in larger masses, which occasionally form a 
skeleton, and thus constitute the transition to those meteoric 
masses of iron in which, as in the Siberian mass of Pallas, 
the other materials disappear more considerably. On account 
of the constant presence of olivin, they are rich in magnesia. 
The olivin is that part of the meteoric stone which is decom- 
posed when it is treated with acids. Like the telluric, it is 
a silicate of magnesia and protoxide of iron. That part which 
is not attacked by acids is a mixture of feldspathic and au- 
gitic matter, whose nature admits of being determined solely 
by calculation from its total constituents, as labrador, horn- 
blende, augite, or ohgoclas. 

'* Q. The second much rarer class of meteoric stones have 
been less examined. They contain partly magnetic iron ore, 
olivin, and some feldspathic and augitic matter ; some of 

K 2 



226 COSMOS. 

them consist merely of the two last-mentioned simple mmei 
als, and the feldspar tribe is then represented by anorthite.^ 
Chrome iron ore (oxyd of chromium and protoxyd of iron) 
is found in small quantity in all meteoric stones ; i^lio^.'phoric 
acid and titanic acid, which Rammelsberg discovered in the 
very remarkable stone of Juvenas, perhaps indicate a'patitB 
and titanite. 

" Of the simple substances hitherto detected in the meteoric 
stones, there are 18 if oxygen, sulphur, phosphorus, carbon^ 
silicium, aluminum, magnesium, calcium, potassium, sodi- 
um, iron, nickel, cobalt, chromium, manganesium, copper ^ 
tin, and titanium. The proximate constituents are, (a.) 
metallic: nickel-iron, a combination of phosphorus with iron 
and nickel, sulphuret of iron and magnetic pyrites ; {b.) oxy- 
dized: magnetic iron ore and chrome iron ore ; {c.) silicates: 
olivin, anorthite, labrador, and augite." 

In order to concentrate the greatest number of important 
facts separated from hypothetic conjectures, it still remains 
for me to develop the manifold analogies which some mete- 
oric stones present as rocks with older, so-called trap rocks 
(dolerites, diorites, and melaphyren), with basalts and more 
recent lava. These analogies are so much the more strik- 
ing, as " the metallic alloy of nickel and iron, which is con- 
stantly contained in certain meteoric masses," has not hither- 
to been discovered in telluric minerals. The same distin- 
guished chemist whose friendly communications I have made 
use of in these last pages, enters fully into this subject in a 
special treatise, $ the results of which will be more appropri- 
ately discussed in the geological part of the Cosmos. 

* Shepard, in Silliman's American Jotirnal of Science and Arts, ser. 
ii., vol. ii., 1846, p. 377; Rammelsberg, in Poggend., Ann., bd. Ixxiii., 
1848, p. 377. 

t Compare Cosmos, vol. i., p. 130. 

X Zeitschrift der Deutschen Geolog. Gesellschaft, bd. i., p. 232. All 
the matter in the text from p. 224 to p. 226, which is between inverted 
commas, was taken from the manuscript of Professor Rammelsberg 
(May, 1851). 



CONCLUSION. 

In concluding the uranological part of the physical de- 
scription of the U7iiverse, in taking a retrospect of what I 
have attempted (I do not say accomplished), after the exe- 
cution of so difficult an undertaking, I think it necessary once 
more to call to mind that this execution could have been ef 
fected only under those conditions which have been indicated 
in the hitroduction to the third volume of Cosmos.- The 
attempt to carry out such a cosmical treatment of the subject 
is limited to the representation of space and its material con- 
tents, whether aggregated into spheres or not. The character 
of the present work differs, therefore, essentially from the more 
comprehensive and excellent eleme^itarij ivorks on astronomy 
which the various literatures of modern times possess. As- 
tronomij, as a science, the triumph of mathematical reason- 
ing, based upon the sure foundation of the doctrine of gravi- 
tation and the perfection of the higher analysis (a mental in- 
strument of investigation), treats of phenomena of motion 
measured according to space and time ; locality (position) of 
the cosmical bodies in their mutual and perpetually-varying 
relations to each other; change of form, as in the tailed 
comets ; change of light, as the sudden appearance or total 
extinction of the light of distant suns. The quantity of mat- 
ter present in the universe remains always the same ; but 
from what has already been discovered in the telluric sphere 
of physical laws of nature, we see working in the eternal 
round of material phenomena an ever-unsatisfied change, 
presenting itself in numberless and nameless cojnhinations. 
Such an exercise of force by matter is called forth by its at 
least apparent heterogeneity. Exciting motion in immeas- 
urably minute spaces, this heterogeneity of matter compli- 
cates all the problems of terrestrial phenomena. 

The astronomical problems are of a simpler nature. 
Hitherto unencumbered by the above-mentioned complica- 
tions, directed to the consideration of the quantities of pon- 
derable matter {masses), to the oscillations producing light 
and heat — the mechanics of the heavens has, precisely on 
account of this simplicity, in which every thing is reduced to 



228 COSMOS. 

motion, remained in all its branches amenable to mathemat- 
ical treatment. This advantage gives to the elementary 
works on theoretical astronomy a great and entirely peculiar 
charm. In them is reflected what the intellectual labors of 
later centuries have achieved by the analytical methods ; 
how configuration and orbits are determined ; how, in the 
phenomena of planetary motion, only small oscillations about 
a mean condition of equilibrium can take place ; how the 
planetary system, from its internal arrangement, works its 
preservation and permanence by the compensation of ^:?er- 
turbations. 

The examination of the means of forming a general con 
ception of the universe, the ex])lanation of the complicated 
celestial phenomena, do not belong to the plan of this work. 
The physical description' of the universe relates to what fills 
space, and organically animates it, in both spheres of urano- 
logical and telluric relations. It adheres to the consideration 
of the discovered laws of nature, and treats of them as ac- 
quired facts, as immediate results of empirical induction. In 
order to carry out the work of the Cosmos within the appro- 
priate limits, and not with too great extension, it must not 
be attempted to establish theoretically the connection of phe- 
nomena. In this Hmitaticn of the plan laid down beforehand, 
I have, in the astronomical volume of Cosmos, applied so 
much the more care to the individual facts and their arrange- 
ment. From the consideration of universal space, its tem- 
perature, the degree of its transparency, and the resisting 
medmm which fills it, I have passed on to natural and tele- 
scopic vision, the limits of visibility, the velocity of light, ac- 
cording to the difference of its sources, the imperfect meas- 
urements of luminous intensity, and the new optical means 
of distinguishing direct from reflected hght. Then follows 
the heaven of fixed stars ; the numerical statement of its 
dclf-luminous suns so far as their position is determined ; their 
probable distribution ; the changeable stars which reappear 
at well-defined periods ; the proper motion of the fixed stars ; 
the assumption of the existence of dark cosmical bodies, and 
their influence upon the motion of the binary stars ; the 
nebulous spots, in so far as these are not remote and very 
dense swarms of stars. 

The transition from the sidereal part of uranology — from 
the heaven of the fixed stars to our solar system, is merely 
a transition from the universal to the particular. In the 
class of binary stars, self-luminous cosmical bodies move about 



CONCLUSION. 220 

a conltaon center of gravity. In our solar system, which is 
constituted of very heterogeneous elements, dark cosmical 
bodies revolve round a self-luminous one, or much rather 
again round a common center of gravity, which at diiierent 
times is situated within and without the central body The 
individual members of the solar system are of dissimilar na- 
ture — more dissia-dlar than for many centuries astronomeis 
were justified in supposing. They are principal and sec 
ondary planets ; among the principal planets a group whose 
orbits intersect each other ; an innumerable host of comets ; 
the ring of the zodiacal hght ; and, with much probability, 
the periodic meteor- asteroids. 

It still remains to state here fully, as actual relations, the 
three great laws of planetary motion, discovered by Kepler. 
First laiv : each orbit of a planetary body is an ellipse, in 
one of whose foci the Sun is situated. Second law : each 
planetary body describes in equal times equal sectors round 
the Sun. Third laiv : the squares of the times of revolu- 
tion of two planets are as the cubes of their mean distances. 
The second law is sometimes called the first, because it was 
discovered earlier. (Kepler, Astronomia Nova, seu Physica 
Codestis, tradita Commentariis de Motibics stellm Martis, 
ex observ. Tychonis Brahi elaborata, 1602 ; compare cap. 
xl. with cap. lix.) The first two laws would be applicable 
if there were only a single planetary body ; the third and 
most important, which was discovered nineteen years after- 
ward, fixes the motions of two planets to one law. (The 
manuscript of the Hartnonice Mundi, which appeared in 
1619, was already completed on the 27th of May, 1618.) 

While the laws of planetary motions were empirically dis- 
covered at the commencement of the seventeenth century ; 
while Newton first discovered the force, of whose action Kep- 
ler's laws were to be considered as necessary consequences ; 
so the end of the eighteenth century has had the merit of de- 
monstrating the stability of the planetary system by the now 
path which the perfected calculation of infinitesimals opened 
to the investigation of astronomical truths. The principal 
elements of this stability are, the invariability of the major 
axes of the planetary orbits, proved by Laplace (1773 and 
1784), Lagrange, and Poisson ; the long periodic change 
(comprised within narrow limits) of the eccentricity of two 
larger planets more distant from the sun, Jupiter and Saturn, 
themselves only -^-^^-^ of the mass of the all-governing central 
body ; finally, the arrangement that, according to the eternaJ 



£30 COSMOS. 

plan of creation, and the nature of the formation of the 
planets, they have all a translatoiy and rotatory motion in 
one direction ; that this motion takes place in orbits of slight 
and but little varying ellipticity, in planes of moderate dif- 
ferences of inclination ; and that the periods of the planeta- 
ry revolutions have among each other no common measure 
Such elements of stability, as it were the maintenance and 
duration of the planets' existence, are dependent upon the 
condition of mutual action with a separate circle. If, by the 
entry of a cosmical body coming from without, and not pre- 
viously belonging to the planetary system, that condition 
was disturbed (Laplace, Expos, du Syst. du Monde, p. 309 
and 391), then this disturbance, as the consequence of new 
attractive forces, or of a collision, might certainly become 
destructive to the existing system, until finally, after long con- 
flict, a new equilibrium was produced. The arrival of a 
comet upon an hyperbolic orbit from a great distance, even 
when want of mass is made up for by immense velocity, can 
excite apprehension only in an imagination which is not sus 
ceptible of the earnest assurances of the calculation of proba- 
bilities. The wandering clouds of the interior comets are 
not more dangerous to our solar system than the great incli- 
nation of the orbits of some of the small planets between 
Mars and Jupiter. Whatever must be characterized as mere 
probability, lies beyond the domain of a phijsical description 
of the universe ; science must not wander into the cloud- 
land of cosmological dreams. 



INDEX TO VOL. IV. 



Abdubrahman Sufi, his notice of neb- 
ulous spots, 15, 44. 
Absence of solar spots and bad harvests, 

supposed connection of, Sir William 

Herschel on, 68. 
Acosta, on the black specks of the south- 
ern hemisphere, 50. 
Adams and Leverrier, claims of, to the 

discovery of Neptune, 179. 
Aerolites, of extraterrestrial cosmical 

origin, 199 ; fall of, 219. 
Alphonsine Tables, their date, 15. 
Anaxagoras of Clazomene, on meteoric 

stones, 206. 
Andromeda, nebula in, its discovery, 16 ; 

further researches, 17, 18 ; not noticed 

by Huygens, 38. 
Anghiera. See Peter Martyr. 
Annular nebula}, rare, 32. 
April, falling stars in, 214. 
Apsides, line of motion of, 123. 
Arabian notices of the Magellanic Clouds, 

15, 44. 
Arago, on the physical constitution of the 

Sun, 62. 
Arago and Plateau, different views of, on 

irradiation, 148. 
ij Argtis, nebula round, its magnificent 

effulgence, 41. 
Asterion, spiral nebula in, 42. 
Asteroids, 57 ; numerical data, 213 ; 01- 

bers'a conjecture as to their origin, 

164; 
Astraea, discovery of, 100 ; elements, 163. 
Atmosphere, lunar, disproved, 147. 
August, falling stars in, 214. 
Axes of rotation, inclination of, 121. 
Axial rotation of the planets, periods of, 

120. 

Bessel, on the planet beyond Uranus, 179. 

Biela's Comet, separation of, into two 
parts, 193 ; elements, 197. 

Black specks in the southern hemisphere, 
50. 

Bode, on solar spots, 66 ; his law of plan- 
etary distance, 116. 

Bond, nebulae resolved by, 32, 39. 

Brorsen's Comet, elements, 197. 

Cadamosto seeks for a south polar star, 28. 

Canes Venatici, spiral nebula in Asterion, 
one of, 4»2; a most remarkable phe- 
nomenon, 42. 

Canopi, three, of Vespucci, 46. 

Cape Catalogue (or Southern Catalogue) 
of Sir John Herschel, 26. 

Oape Clouds, or Magellanic Clouds, 43 ; 
eoutliem cloiflis vaguefy so called, 45, 



Cassini, on nebulae, 19 ; on the Suo'i 
spots, 65. 

Ceres, discovery of, 100 ; elements, 163. 

Chinese statements as to the obliquity of 
the ecliptic, 125 ; as to comets, 186 ; aa 
to falling stars and meteoric stones, 206. 

Classification of nebulae, 19, 32 ; of plan- 
ets, 101. 

Coal-bags, or coal-sacks, in the southern 
hemisphere, 50. 

Colored glasses, early use of, by Belgian 
pilots, 65. 

Comet of Aristotle, 187. 

Comet of Colla and Bremiker, 196. 

Comet, Halley's, 186, 195. 

Comet, Olbers's, 195. 

Comets, orbits of, indicate the limits of 
the solar system, 57 ; called light- 
clouds by the Greeks, 181 ; hypothesis 
of their similarity to asteroids, 182; 
number discovered annually, 184 ; re- 
appearance of Halley's Comet, 186; 
Chinese statements, 186; Comet of Aris- 
totle, 187; tails of comets, 189, 192; ra- 
diant heat, 191 ; Lexell's Comet, 191 ; 
Biela's Comet, 193; numerical data, 
195; elements of the six interior com 
ets, 197 ; inclination of the orbits, 198 ; 
Chaldean opinions on, 200. 

Craters of the Moon, 155. 

Crema, great fall of aerolites at, 220. 

Cusa, Cardinal de, his remarkable viewa 
of the physical constitution of the Sun, 
62 ; on the motion of the Earth, 64. 

Cygnus, nebula in, 46. 

D' Arrest's Comet, elements, 197. 

Days and hours, planetary, 94. 

December, falling stars in, 216. 

De Hoces discovers the southern ex- 
tremity of the new continent, 46. 

Densities of the planets, 119. 

De Vico's Comet, elements, 197. 

Dione, a sateUite of Saturn, 174. 

Distances of the planets from the Sun, 
107. 

Double nebulae, 32. 

Double stars differ in their natural char- 
acter from our solar system, 53. 

Dunlop, his observations of nebulae at 
Paramatta, 22, 26. 

Earth, the, distance, and other numerica. 
data, 141 ; nutation, 105, 125. 

Earth-light, what, 144 ; known to Leon- 
ardo da Vinci, 145. 

Egeria, discovery of, 101 ; elements, 163. 

Elliptical nebulae, named the norma] 
type, 31. 



232 



COSMOS. 



Enceladus, a satellite of Saturn, 174. 
Encke's Comet, elements, 197 ; its reap- 
pearance, 198. 
Epochs, main, of planetary discovery, 57. 
Eccentricity of the planetary orbits, 127. 
Exterior planets, 102. 

Fabricius first observes the solar spots, 64. 
Faculee and shallows, 86. 
Page's Comet, elements, 197. 
FaHing stars, 204. 

Faraday on atmospheric magnetism, 84. 
Fire-balls, 198. 

Flora, discovery of, 101 ; elements, 163. 
Fontaney, the Jesuit, on the Magellanic 
Clouds, 47. 

Galileo, his contro%'ersy vs^ith Marius, 16 , 
his Mundus Jovialis, 17 ; use of colored 
glasses neglected by, 65. 

Geminus mentions nebulous stars, 15. 

Gnomons, ancient, 127. 

Halley's observations on nebulae, 19. 
Halley's Comet, reappearances of, 186. 
Heat, rays of, 83. 

Heat possessed by the Moon's light, 143. 
Hebe, discovery of, 101 ; elements, 163. 
Heis's observations on shooting stars, 212. 
Herschel, Sir William, his estimate of the 
extent of nebulous spots, 14; his dis- 
coveries, 21 ; on the nebula of Orion, 
40; on solar spots, 67; opposed to the 
assumption of a lunar atmosphere, 147. 
Herschel, Sir John, on nebulte and stellar 
clusters, 27, 31 ; on irregular nebulous 
masses, 35 ; on the nebula in Orion, 38 ; 
on the nebula round tj Argus, 41 ; on 
the nebula in Vulpes, 41; his descrip- 
tion of the Magellanic Clouds, 47 ; on 
the black specks and coal-bags of the 
southern hemisphere, 51 ; on the heat 
of the Moon's surface, 131. 
Herschel, Miss, discovery of a nebula by, 

31. 
Hipparchus mentions nebulous stars, 15. 
jlouzeau's observations on the zodiacal 

light, 204. 
Humboldt, Alexander von, works of, 
quoted in various notes : 
Asie Centrale, 222. 
De Distributione Geographies Plan- 

tarum, 123. 
Examen Critique de I'Histoire de la 
Geographic du Nouveau Conti- 
nent, 15. 28, 45, 151. 
Kleinen Schriften, 114. 
Voyage aux Regions Equinoxiales, 

215. 
Vues des Cordilleres et Monumens 
des Peuples Indigenes de I'Am^- 
rique, 98. 
Huygens discovers the nebula in the 

sword of Orion, 19, 37. 
Hygeia, discovery of, 101 ; elements, 163. 
Hyperion, a satellite of Saturn, 174. 

Intensity of the solar light on the planets, 

130. 
Interior comets, 197. 



I Interior planets, 103 
! Irene, discovery of, 101 ; elements, 163. 
; Iris, discoveiy of, 101 ; elements, 103. 
i Irregular nebulous masses, 33 ; situats 
near the Milky Way, 34 ; extraordinary 
size and singular forms, 36. 
Isaac, Aben Sid Hassan, introduces tho 
Latinized term nebulosaj into the Al- 
phonsine Tables, 15. 
Jacob, Captain, on the nebula round i) 

Argus, 41. 
Japetus, a satellite of Saturn, 174. 
July, falling stars in, 214. 
Juno, discovery of, 100 ; elements, 163. 
Jupiter, numerical data, 165; streaks, or 

girdles, 167. 
Jupiter's satellites, numerical data, 169. 

Kant's speculations on nebulae and star- 
formation, 20. 

Kepler on planetary distances, 110 ; lawa 
of planetary motion discovered by, 229. 

Lacaille, his classification of nebulsB, 19. 

Lambert's speculations on nebulse, 20. 

Lassell, discovery of a satellite of Saturn 
by, 174; of satellites of Neptune by, 
180. 

Laurentius stream of falling stars, 214. 

Le Geutil's study of nebulae, 20. 

Leonardo da Vinci, Earth-light known to, 
145. 

Leverrier and Adams, claims to the dis- 
covery of Neptune, 179. 

Lexell's Comet, 191. 

Light, time required to traverse the radiut 
of the Earth's orbit, 60 ; solar and arti- 
ficial, 82 ; diflerence of intensity in the 
different planets, 130. 

Light, zodiacal. See Zodiacal hght. 

Light-clouds, comets so styled by th« 
Greeks, 181. 

Lucerna Mundi, the Sun, 59. 

Lunar atmosphere disproved, 147, 

Lunar spots, 149. 

Magellanic Clouds, early notices of, 15; 
termed Cape-clouds by the Portu 
guese, 43 ; general adoption of the 
name, 46 ; described by Sir John Her- 
schel, 48; not connected with one an- 
other, 48 ; nor with the Milky Way, 43. 

Magnitude, absolute and apparent, of 
planets, 105. 

Map of the Moon, 151. 

Mars, numerical data, 159 ; raeteorologic 
al analogies with the Earth, 159. 

Masses of the planets, 118. 

Ma}-, falling stars in, 214. 

Mayer, of Gunzenhausen (Simon Marius) 
first describes a nebula, 16. 

Mercury, distance, diameter, mass, donsi 
ty of, 1.37. 

Messier, his discoveries regarding nebu 
las, 21. 

Meteor asteroids, 57. 

Meteoric stones, 57 ; seldom fall from ■ 
clear sky, 219 ; remarkable falls oC 
219 ; analysis, 223. 

Metis, discovery of, 101*; elements, 163. 



INDEX. 



233 



Micholl conceives all nebulae to bt stellar 
clustors, 20. 

Milky Way, Iluygens on the, 38. 

Mimas, a satellite of Saturn, 174. 

Moon, myths respecting the, 113, 115 ; 
estimate of the heat of its surface, 130 ; 
numerical data, 141 ; moonlight, 142 ; 
capable of producing heat, 143 ; styled 
by the Indians, King of the stars of 

. cold, 143 ; eclipses, 145 ; predictions 
from the color of the eclipsed body, 
147 ; lunar twilight disproved, 147 ; 
probably a voiceless wilderness, 148 ; 
irradiation, 148; spots, 149; supposed 
to reflect the surface of our planet, 150; 
topographical chart, 151 ; so-called seas, 
151 ; mountains, 153 ; comparison of 
height with the mountains of the 
Earth, 15.3; ray-systems, 154 ; annular 
plains, 154 ; craters of elevation, 155 ; 
rills, 157; influence on the Earth, 157. 

Mountains of the Moon, 153. 

Mundus Jovialis, a work by Galileo, 16. 

Nebula, the first isolnted, discovered, 16. 

NebulcB, l-acaille's classification of, 19 ; 
discoveries of the Kerschels, 21 ; of the 
Earl of Rosse and others, 22 ; probably 
no essential physical distinction be- 
tween, and clusters of stars, 23 ; ques- 
tion of the existence or non-existence 
of a self-luminous, vaporous matter, 24 ; 
elliptical, 31; annular, 32; planetary, 
33 ; nebulous stars, 34 ; galaxy of, not 
confirmed by recent observation, 36. 

Nebular theoiy, the, 20; independent of 
the theory of sidereal aggregation, 21. 

Nebulous masses, regular, 29 ; irregular, 
33 ; these latter mostly situate near the 
Milky Way, 34 ; extraordinary size of 
some, and singular forms of others, 36. 

Nebulous spots, 13 ; number whose posi- 
tions have been determined, 14 ; early 
notices of, 14 ; Galileo's discoveries, 17 ; 
Huygens, 19 ; Lacaille, 19 ; other in- 
vestigators, 20; the discoveries of the 
Herschels. 21 ; the Earl of Rosse, 22 ; 
Sir John Ilerschel's distribution of, 27. 

Nebulous stars, mentioned by Hippar- 
chus, Geminus, and Ptolemy, 15 ; a 
modern division of regular nebulse, 34. 

Neptune, considerations on the distance 
of, 178 ; numerical data, 178 ; claims to 
the discovery of, 178. 

Neptune, satellites of, 180. 

Northern Catalogue of the IIen:chels, 25. 

Northern hemisphere poasesoes many 
nebulffi, and but few clusters of stars, 
27. 

November period, meteors of the, 209, 
21.5. 

Nubecula Major and Minor, 20, 46. 

Number and epoch of discovery of the 
principal planets, 89. 

Nutation of the Earth's axio, 105, 125. 

October, falling stars in, 214. 

Olbers's conjecture as to the asteroids 
being fragments of a single destroy^J 
planet, 164 ; on shooting stars, 216, 



Orbits, inclination of, planetary, 121 ; 
cometary, 198. 

Orion, nebula in the sword of, 18, 36 ; in 
the head of, 36 ; trapezium not sur- 
rounded by a nebula, 39 ; new stars 
discovered in the trapezium, 39. 

Pallas, discovery of, 100 ; elements, 161. 

Parthenope, discovery of, 101 ; elements, 
163. 

Penumbras of the solar body, 67. 

Periodic meteons, number of, observed 
at different hours, and in difterent 
months, 213. 

Perpetual spring, its undesirable nature, 
123. 

Perseus, falling stars issuing from, 210. 

Peruvian seven-day week, an error, 98. 

Peter Martyr, his description of the Ma- 
gellanic Clouds, 46; on a fall of aero- 
htes, 219. 

Photosphere of the nebulous stars, 34 ; 
of the Sun, 62. 

Picard investigates the nebula in Orion, 
19. 

Pisces, nebulous region of, 28. 

Planetary discovery, epochs of, 58. 

Planetary motion, three great laws of, 228. 

Planetary nebulae, 33; mainly found in 
the southern hemisphere, 33. 

Planetary system, stability of, how de- 
monstrated, 229. 

Planets and their satellites, general con- 
siderations, 88 ; principal planets, 89 ; 
discovery, 89 ; names, 91 ; planetary 
signs, not of ancient date, 94 ; days and 
metals named from, 94 ; early conjec- 
tures that other planets remained to 
be discovered, 99 ; periods of discovery 
since the invention of the telescope, 
■100; classification in two groups, 102; 
exterior, generally larger than the in 
teiior, 103; absolute and apparent mag 
nitudes, 104 ; arrangement and dis- 
tances, 107 ; assumed laws, by Titiu 
and Bode, and Wurm, 116; masses 
118; densities, 119 ; periods of revolu 
tion, and axial rotation, 120; inclina 
tion, 121; eccentricitv, 127; intensit) 
of the Sun's light, 130r 

Planets, secondary, numerical data, 131, 

Planets, the small, numerical data, 160 , 
table of elements, 163; Olbers's con- 
jecture as to their origin, 164. - 

Plateau on irradiation, 148. 

Principal planets, 89. 

Proselenes, astronomical myth of the. 
113. 

Ptolemy mentions nebulous stars, 15. 

Regular nebulas, classification of, 29. 
Revolution, periods of, of the planets, 

120 ; of comets, 195. 
Rhea, a satellite of Saturn, 174. 
Robinson, Dr., neb»la3 resolved by, 22. 
Rosse, Earl of, discoveries by means of 

his powerful telescope, 22 ; his caution. 

23. 
Sabbath, used as a name for thi whola 

week, 95. 



2M 



COSMOS 



Sagittar.us, nebula in, 41. 

Sanscrit names of planets, 93. 

Satellites, general considerations on, 131. 

Saturn, numerical data, ITO ; rings, 171 ; 
eccentric position, 172. 

Sat'irn's satellites, numerical data, 174. 

Schwabe's observations on the solar 
spots, 85 ; on the eccentric position of 
Saturn, 172. 

feJcythien myth of a fall of gold (meteors), 
221. 

Seas (so called) of the Moon, 151. 

Secondary planets, 131. 

Sheeting e4;ars, upper limits of the height 
of, unascertained, 217 ; various colors, 
217 ; magnitudes, 219. 

Siderj BorLonia and Sidera Austriaca, 
64. 

Sidereal aggregation, theory of, 21. 

Sidereal periods of revolution and axial 
rotation of the planets, 120. 

Sirius, and other fixed stars, estimates 
of the distance of, 55. 

Small planots, 160. 

Snow spots in Mars, 160. 

Solar system, ditference between, and the 
system of double stars, 53 ; its limits in- 
dicated by the orbits of comets, 57 ; its 
constituents, 57. 

South, Sir James, nebulae resolved by, 22. 

South polar star, search for a, 29. 

Southern Catalogue of the Herachels, 
25. 

Southern Cross, planetary nebula in, 33 ; 
black spot in, 46, 51. 

Southern hemisphere, with fewer nebulse, 
possesses relatively more clusters of 
stars than the northern, 29 ; the Magel- 
lanic Clouds, 15, 45. 

Spiral nebula in Asterion, 42. 

Spots, solar, 72, 86 ; lunar, 149 ; on Mars, 
160. 

Star catalogues, early, 47 ; the Herschels', 
25 ; the Northern, 26 ; the Southern, 26. 

Star clusters, 17; predominate in the 
southern hemisphere, 27. 

Star-formation theory, the, 21 ; inde- 
pendent of the nebular theory, 21. 

Stellar clusters, probably no essential 
physical difference between, and nebu- 
IcB, 23 ; in the northern and the south- 
ern hemispheres, 27. 

Stemhaufen, star clusters, 17. 

Subel, a vague term of the Arabian astron- 
omers, 46 



Sun, domain of the, 53 ; its constituents 
57; translatory motion, 134. 

Sun, considered as the central body, 59 , 
numerical data, 60 ; conjectures as to 
its physical character, 61 ; envelopes, 
62 ; penumbras, 67 ; protuberances, 70. 
135 ; distribution of solar spots, 72 • 
chronological list of remarkable ap- 
pearances of, 74 ; intensity of solar 
light, 79 ; comparison of artificial light, 
82 ; rays of light and rays of heat, 83 ; 
Schwabe's table of occurrence of solar 
spots, 86. 

Telescope, discoveries of planets since 

the invention of the, 100 ; the Earl of 

Rosse's, 22. 
Tethys, a satellite of Saturn, 174. 
Titan, a satellite of Saturn, 174. 
Titius, on the law of planetary distances, 

116. 
Transits of Venus, 139. 
Trapezium of Orion, discovery of new 

stars in, 39. 

Uranus, numerical data, 175. 

Uranus, satellites of, peculiarity of their 
motion, 176 ; their number undeterm- 
ined, 177. 

Ursa Major, planetary nebula in, 33. 

Ursa Minor, /3 and y, 29. 

Venus, distance, brilliancy, rotation, trans* 

its, spots, mountains of, 138. 
Vespucci searches for a south polar star, 

29 ; his mention of the Magellanic 

Clouds, 45. 
Vesta, discovery of, 100 ; elements, 163. 
Victoria, discovery of, 101 ; elements, 163. 
Virgo, nebulous region of, 28. 
Volcanoes of the Moon, 156. 
Vulpes, nebula in, 41. 

Week, or seven-day period, early diffused 

among the Semitic nations, 95; the 

Peruvian, an error, 98. 
White Ox, the large Magellanic Cloud, so 

called by the Arabians, 15, 43. 
Wilson, on solar spots, 66. 
Wurm, his correction of Bode's law of 

planetary distance, 118. 

Zodiacal light, early speculations on, 25; 
later opinions, 202 ; observRtions by 
the author and others, 203.